

29. Curr Top Microbiol Immunol. 2015;391:355-81. doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-22834-1_12.

Immune Evasion by Epstein-Barr Virus.

Ressing ME(1)(2), van Gent M(1), Gram AM(1)(2), Hooykaas MJ(1), Piersma SJ(1),
Wiertz EJ(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology, University Medical Center Utrecht,
Utrecht, The Netherlands.
(2)Department of Molecular Cell Biology, Leiden University Medical Center,
Leiden, The Netherlands.
(3)Department of Medical Microbiology, University Medical Center Utrecht,
Utrecht, The Netherlands. ewiertz@umcutrecht.nl.

Epstein-Bar virus (EBV) is widespread within the human population with over 90%
of adults being infected. In response to primary EBV infection, the host mounts
an antiviral immune response comprising both innate and adaptive effector
functions. Although the immune system can control EBV infection to a large
extent, the virus is not cleared. Instead, EBV establishes a latent infection in 
B lymphocytes characterized by limited viral gene expression. For the production 
of new viral progeny, EBV reactivates from these latently infected cells. During 
the productive phase of infection, a repertoire of over 80 EBV gene products is
expressed, presenting a vast number of viral antigens to the primed immune
system. In particular the EBV-specific CD4+ and CD8+ memory T lymphocytes can
respond within hours, potentially destroying the virus-producing cells before
viral replication is completed and viral particles have been released. Preceding 
the adaptive immune response, potent innate immune mechanisms provide a first
line of defense during primary and recurrent infections. In spite of this broad
range of antiviral immune effector mechanisms, EBV persists for life and
continues to replicate. Studies performed over the past decades have revealed a
wide array of viral gene products interfering with both innate and adaptive
immunity. These include EBV-encoded proteins as well as small noncoding RNAs with
immune-evasive properties. The current review presents an overview of the evasion
strategies that are employed by EBV to facilitate immune escape during latency
and productive infection. These evasion mechanisms may also compromise the
elimination of EBV-transformed cells, and thus contribute to malignancies
associated with EBV infection.

DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-22834-1_12 
PMID: 26428381  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
