Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no potential conflicts ofinterest to disclose.5. J Virol. 2018 Jan 2;92(2). pii: e01466-17. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01466-17. Print 2018 Jan 15.Early Epstein-Barr Virus Genomic Diversity and Convergence toward the B95.8Genome in Primary Infection.Weiss ER(1), Lamers SL(2), Henderson JL(1), Melnikov A(3), Somasundaran M(4),Garber M(1), Selin L(5), Nusbaum C(3), Luzuriaga K(6).Author information: (1)Program in Molecular Medicine, University of Massachusetts Medical School,Worcester, Massachusetts, USA.(2)Bioinfoexperts LLC, Thibodaux, Louisiana, USA.(3)Broad Technology Labs, Broad Institute, Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA.(4)Biochemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, University of Massachusetts MedicalSchool, Worcester, Massachusetts, USA.(5)Pathology, University of Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester,Massachusetts, USA.(6)Program in Molecular Medicine, University of Massachusetts Medical School,Worcester, Massachusetts, USA Katherine.luzuriaga@umassmed.edu.Over 90% of the world's population is persistently infected with Epstein-Barrvirus. While EBV does not cause disease in most individuals, it is the commoncause of acute infectious mononucleosis (AIM) and has been associated withseveral cancers and autoimmune diseases, highlighting a need for a preventivevaccine. At present, very few primary, circulating EBV genomes have beensequenced directly from infected individuals. While low levels of diversity andlow viral evolution rates have been predicted for double-stranded DNA (dsDNA)viruses, recent studies have demonstrated appreciable diversity in common dsDNApathogens (e.g., cytomegalovirus). Here, we report 40 full-length EBV genomesequences obtained from matched oral wash and B cell fractions from a cohort of10 AIM patients. Both intra- and interpatient diversity were observed across the length of the entire viral genome. Diversity was most pronounced in viral genesrequired for establishing latent infection and persistence, with appreciablelevels of diversity also detected in structural genes, including envelopeglycoproteins. Interestingly, intrapatient diversity declined significantly over time (P < 0.01), and this was particularly evident on comparison of viral genomessequenced from B cell fractions in early primary infection and convalescence (P <0.001). B cell-associated viral genomes were observed to converge, becomingnearly identical to the B95.8 reference genome over time (Spearman rank-ordercorrelation test; r = -0.5589, P = 0.0264). The reduction in diversity was mostmarked in the EBV latency genes. In summary, our data suggest independentconvergence of diverse viral genome sequences toward a reference-like strainwithin a relatively short period following primary EBV infection.IMPORTANCEIdentification of viral proteins with low variability and high immunogenicity is important for the development of a protective vaccine. Knowledge of genomediversity within circulating viral populations is a key step in this process, as is the expansion of intrahost genomic variation during infection. We reportfull-length EBV genomes sequenced from the blood and oral wash of 10 individuals early in primary infection and during convalescence. Our data demonstrateconsiderable diversity within the pool of circulating EBV strains, as well aswithin individual patients. Overall viral diversity decreased from early topersistent infection, particularly in latently infected B cells, which serve asthe viral reservoir. Reduction in B cell-associated viral genome diversitycoincided with a convergence toward a reference-like EBV genotype. Greaterconvergence positively correlated with time after infection, suggesting that the reference-like genome is the result of selection.Copyright © 2018 American Society for Microbiology.DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01466-17 PMCID: PMC5752928PMID: 29093087  [Indexed for MEDLINE]