12. Retrovirology. 2015 Apr 30;12:39. doi: 10.1186/s12977-015-0167-3.Key determinants of target DNA recognition by retroviral intasomes.Serrao E(1), Ballandras-Colas A(2), Cherepanov P(3)(4), Maertens GN(5), Engelman AN(6).Author information: (1)Department of Cancer Immunology and AIDS, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute,Boston, MA, USA. SerraoErik_Serrao@DFCI.HARVARD.EDU.(2)Department of Cancer Immunology and AIDS, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute,Boston, MA, USA. Allison_Ballandras-Colas@DFCI.HARVARD.edu.(3)Division of Infectious Diseases, Imperial College London, London, UK.Peter.Cherepanov@crick.ac.uk.(4)Clare Hall Laboratories, The Francis Crick Institute, London, UK.Peter.Cherepanov@crick.ac.uk.(5)Division of Infectious Diseases, Imperial College London, London, UK.g.maertens@imperial.ac.uk.(6)Department of Cancer Immunology and AIDS, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute,Boston, MA, USA. alan_engelman@dfci.harvard.edu.BACKGROUND: Retroviral integration favors weakly conserved palindrome sequencesat the sites of viral DNA joining and generates a short (4-6 bp) duplication ofhost DNA flanking the provirus. We previously determined two key parameters that underlie the target DNA preference for prototype foamy virus (PFV) and humanimmunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) integration: flexible pyrimidine (Y)/purine(R) dinucleotide steps at the centers of the integration sites, and base contactswith specific integrase residues, such as Ala188 in PFV integrase and Ser119 inHIV-1 integrase. Here we examined the dinucleotide preference profiles of a rangeof retroviruses and correlated these findings with respect to length of targetsite duplication (TSD).RESULTS: Integration datasets covering six viral genera and the three lengths of TSD were accessed from the literature or generated in this work. All virusesexhibited significant enrichments of flexible YR and/or selection against rigidRY dinucleotide steps at the centers of integration sites, and the magnitude ofthis enrichment inversely correlated with TSD length. The DNA sequenceenvironments of in vivo-generated HIV-1 and PFV sites were consistent withintegration into nucleosomes, however, the local sequence preferences werelargely independent of target DNA chromatinization. Integration sites derivedfrom cells infected with the gammaretrovirus reticuloendotheliosis virus strain A(Rev-A), which yields a 5 bp TSD, revealed the targeting of global chromatinfeatures most similar to those of Moloney murine leukemia virus, which yields a 4bp duplication. In vitro assays revealed that Rev-A integrase interacts with and is catalytically stimulated by cellular bromodomain containing 4 protein.CONCLUSIONS: Retroviral integrases have likely evolved to bend target DNA to fit scissile phosphodiester bonds into two active sites for integration, and viruses that cut target DNA with a 6 bp stagger may not need to bend DNA as sharply asviruses that cleave with 4 bp or 5 bp staggers. For PFV and HIV-1, the selection of signature bases and central flexibility at sites of integration is largelyindependent of chromatin structure. Furthermore, global Rev-A integration islikely directed to chromatin features by bromodomain and extraterminal domainproteins.DOI: 10.1186/s12977-015-0167-3 PMCID: PMC4422553PMID: 25924943  [Indexed for MEDLINE]