

19. J Virol. 2015 Feb;89(4):1965-74. doi: 10.1128/JVI.03279-14. Epub 2014 Dec 3.

Generation and evaluation of clade C simian-human immunodeficiency virus
challenge stocks.

Chang HW(1), Tartaglia LJ(1), Whitney JB(2), Lim SY(1), Sanisetty S(3), Lavine
CL(1), Seaman MS(1), Rademeyer C(4), Williamson C(4), Ellingson-Strouss K(5),
Stamatatos L(6), Kublin J(7), Barouch DH(8).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Virology and Vaccine Research, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical
Center, Boston, Massachusetts, USA Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts,
USA.
(2)Center for Virology and Vaccine Research, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical
Center, Boston, Massachusetts, USA Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts,
USA Ragon Institute of MGH, MIT, and Harvard, Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA.
(3)Center for Virology and Vaccine Research, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical
Center, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
(4)Division of Medical Virology, Institute of Infectious Diseases and Molecular
Medicine, University of Cape Town, Cape Town, South Africa.
(5)Seattle Biomedical Research Institute, Seattle, Washington, USA.
(6)Seattle Biomedical Research Institute, Seattle, Washington, USA Fred
Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle, Washington, USA.
(7)Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle, Washington, USA.
(8)Center for Virology and Vaccine Research, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical
Center, Boston, Massachusetts, USA Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts,
USA Ragon Institute of MGH, MIT, and Harvard, Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA
dbarouch@bidmc.harvard.edu.

The development of a panel of mucosally transmissible simian-human
immunodeficiency virus (SHIV) challenge stocks from multiple virus clades would
facilitate preclinical evaluation of candidate HIV-1 vaccines and therapeutics.
The majority of SHIV stocks that have been generated to date have been derived
from clade B HIV-1 env sequences from viruses isolated during chronic infection
and typically required serial animal-to-animal adaptation for establishing
mucosal transmissibility and pathogenicity. To capture essential features of
mucosal transmission of clade C viruses, we produced a series of SHIVs with early
clade C HIV-1 env sequences from acutely HIV-1-infected individuals from South
Africa. SHIV-327c and SHIV-327cRM expressed env sequences that were 99.7 to 100% 
identical to the original HIV-1 isolate and did not require in vivo passaging for
mucosal infectivity. These challenge stocks infected rhesus monkeys efficiently
by both intrarectal and intravaginal routes, replicated to high levels during
acute infection, and established chronic setpoint viremia in 13 of 17 (76%)
infected animals. The SHIV-327cRM challenge stock was also titrated for both
single, high-dose intrarectal challenges and repetitive, low-dose intrarectal
challenges in rhesus monkeys. These SHIV challenge stocks should facilitate the
preclinical evaluation of vaccines and other interventions aimed at preventing
clade C HIV-1 infection.IMPORTANCE: We describe the development of two related
clade C SHIV challenge stocks. These challenge stocks should prove useful for
preclinical testing of vaccines and other interventions aimed at preventing clade
C HIV-1 infection.

Copyright © 2015, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.03279-14 
PMCID: PMC4338880
PMID: 25473043  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
