

25. AIDS Rev. 2014 Jan-Mar;16(1):23-34.

Origin and diversity of human retroviruses.

Peeters M(1), D'Arc M, Delaporte E.

Author information: 
(1)UMI 233, Institut de Recherche pour le Développement (IRD) and University of
Montpellier 1, Montpellier, France.

Simian immunodeficiency viruses, simian T‑cell lymphotropic viruses, and simian
foamy viruses from nonhuman primates have crossed the species barrier to humans
at several time points, leading to the HIV and human T lymphotropic virus
epidemic and to sporadic cases of human infections with simian foamy viruses,
respectively. Efficient infection and spread in humans differs between simian
foamy virus, simian lymphotropic virus, and simian immunodeficiency virus, but
seems also to differ among the different viruses from the same simian lineage, as
illustrated by the different spread of HIV‑1 M, N O, P or for the different HIV‑2
groups. Among the four HIV‑1 groups, only HIV‑1 group M has spread worldwide, and
the actual diversity within HIV‑1 M (subtypes, circulating recombinants) is the
result of subsequent evolution and spread in the human population. HIV‑2 only
spread to some extent in West Africa, and similarly as for HIV‑1, the nine HIV‑2 
groups have also a different epidemic history. Four types of human T lymphotropic
virus, type 1 to 4, have been described in humans and for three of them simian
counterparts (simian T lymphotropic virus‑1, ‑2, ‑3) have been identified in
multiple nonhuman primate species. The majority of human infections are with
human T lymphotropic virus‑1, which is present throughout the world as clusters
of high endemicity. Humans are susceptible to a wide variety of simian foamy
viruses and seem to acquire these viruses more readily than simian
immunodeficiency viruses or simian T lymphotropic viruses, but neither signs of
disease in humans nor human‑to‑human transmission of simian foamy virus have been
documented yet. The current HIV‑1 M epidemic illustrates the impact of a single
cross‑species transmission. The recent discovery of HIV‑1 P, HIV‑2 I, new human T
lymphotropic virus‑1 and ‑3 variants, as well as simian foamy virus infections in
humans in Central Africa, show that our knowledge of genetic diversity and
cross‑species transmissions of simian retroviruses is still incomplete.


PMCID: PMC4289907
PMID: 24584106  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
