

36. J Virol. 2013 Feb;87(4):1937-46. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01442-12. Epub 2012 Dec 5.

Betaretroviral envelope subunits are noncovalently associated and restricted to
the mammalian class.

Henzy JE(1), Coffin JM.

Author information: 
(1)Tufts University School of Medicine, Department of Molecular Biology and
Microbiology, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.

The structure of the transmembrane subunit (TM) of the retroviral envelope
glycoprotein (Env) is highly conserved among most retrovirus genera and includes 
a pair of cysteines that forms an intramolecular disulfide loop within the
ectodomain. Alpha-, gamma-, and deltaretroviruses have a third cysteine, adjacent
to the loop, which forms a disulfide bond between TM and the surface subunit (SU)
of Env, while lentiviruses, which have noncovalently associated subunits, lack
this third cysteine. The Betaretrovirus genus includes Jaagsiekte sheep
retrovirus (JSRV) and mouse mammary tumor virus (MMTV), as well as many
endogenous retroviruses. Envelope subunit association had not been characterized 
in the betaretroviruses, but lack of a third cysteine in the TM ectodomain
suggested noncovalently associated subunits. We tested the Env proteins of JSRV
and MMTV, as well as human endogenous retrovirus K (HERV-K)108--a
betaretrovirus-like human endogenous retrovirus--for intersubunit bonding and
found that, as in the lentiviruses, the Env subunits lack an intersubunit
disulfide bond. Since these results suggest that the number of cysteines in the
TM loop region readily distinguishes between covalent and noncovalent structure, 
we surveyed endogenous retroviral TM sequences in the genomes of vertebrates
represented in public databases and found that (i) retroviruses with
noncovalently associated subunits have been present during all of anthropoid
evolution and (ii) the noncovalent env motif is limited to mammals, while the
covalent type is found among five vertebrate classes. We discuss implications of 
these findings for retroviral evolution, cross-species transmissions, and
recombination events involving the env gene.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01442-12 
PMCID: PMC3571459
PMID: 23221553  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
