48. Vet Microbiol. 1992 Nov;33(1-4):311-31.Animal immunodeficiency viruses.Egberink H(1), Horzinek MC.Author information: (1)Institute of Virology, School of Veterinary Medicine, State University ofUtrecht, Netherlands.Feline immunodeficiency virus (FIV) has morphological, physical and biochemicalcharacteristics similar to human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), the cause of AIDS in man. However, it is antigenically and genetically distinct from HIV; anantigenic relatedness with equine infectious anaemia virus has been demonstrated.FIV has been molecularly cloned and sequenced. Diagnostic tests are commercially available and attempts at preparing inactivated, subunit and molecularlyengineered vaccines are being made in different laboratories. During FIVinfection a transient primary illness can be recognized, with fever, neutropenia and lymphadenopathy. After a long period of clinical normalcy a secondary stageis distinguished with signs of an immunodeficiency-like syndrome. The incubation period for this stage can be as long as 5 years, during which gradual impairment of immune function develops. Many FIV-infected cats are presented for the firsttime showing vague signs of illness: recurrent fevers, emaciation, lack ofappetite, lymphadenopathy, anaemia, leucopenia and behavioural changes. Later,the predominant clinical signs observed are chronic stomatitis/gingivitis,enteritis, upper respiratory tract infections, and infections of the skin.Neoplasias, neurological, immunological and haematological disorder are seen in asmaller proportion. The immunodeficiency-like syndrome is progressive over aperiod of months to years. Concomitant infection with feline leukaemia virus has been shown to accelerate the progression of disease. In vitro, phenotypic mixing between FIV and an endogenous feline oncovirus (RD114) has been demonstratedwhich leads to a broadening of the cell spectrum of the lentivirus. Bovineimmunodeficiency virus (BIV) has been isolated only once, and all attempts toobtain additional isolates have failed; it has been recovered from the leucocytesof cattle with persistent lymphocytosis, lymphadenopathy, lesions in the central nervous system, progressive weakness and emaciation. As with the felinerepresentative, BIV also was found to possess a lentivirus morphology and toencode a reverse transcriptase with Mg++ preference; it replicates and inducessyncytia in a variety of embryonic bovine tissues in vitro. Antigenic analyseshave demonstrated a conservation of epitopes between the major core protein ofBIV and HIV. The original isolate has been molecularly cloned and sequenced.Besides the three large open reading frames (ORFs) comprising the gag, pol, andenv genes common to all replication-competent retroviruses, five additional smallORFs were found. Numerous point mutations and deletions were found, mostly in theenv-encoding ORF. These data suggest that, within a single virus isolate, BIVdisplays extensive genomic variation.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 400 WORDS)PMID: 1336243  [Indexed for MEDLINE]