
Conflict of interest statement: The author declares no conflicts of interest.


10. J Infect Dis. 2017 Dec 1;216(suppl_9):S829-S833. doi: 10.1093/infdis/jix397.

Next-Generation Human Immunodeficiency Virus Sequencing for Patient Management
and Drug Resistance Surveillance.

Noguera-Julian M(1)(2)(3), Edgil D(4), Harrigan PR(5), Sandstrom P(6), Godfrey
C(7), Paredes R(1)(2)(3)(8).

Author information: 
(1)IrsiCaixa AIDS Research Institute.
(2)Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona.
(3)Universitat de Vic-Universitat Central de Catalunya, Spain.
(4)United States Agency for International Development.
(5)British Columbia Centre for Excellence in HIV/AIDS, University of British
Columbia.
(6)National HIV and Retrovirology Laboratory, JC Wilt Infectious Diseases
Research Centre, Public Health Agency of Canada, Canada.
(7)Division of AIDS, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases,
National Institutes of Health.
(8)Infectious Diseases Unit, Hospital Universitari Germans Trias i Pujol, Spain.

High-quality, simplified, and low-cost human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) drug
resistance tests that are able to provide timely actionable HIV resistance data
at individual, population, and programmatic levels are needed to confront the
emerging drug-resistant HIV epidemic. Next-generation sequencing technologies
embedded in automated cloud-computing analysis environments are ideally suited
for such endeavor. Whereas NGS can reduce costs over Sanger sequencing, automated
analysis pipelines make NGS accessible to molecular laboratories regardless of
the available bioinformatic skills. They can also produce highly structured,
high-quality data that could be examined by healthcare officials and program
managers on a real-time basis to allow timely public health action. Here we
discuss the opportunities and challenges of such an approach.

© The Author 2017. Published by Oxford University Press for the Infectious
Diseases Society of America. All rights reserved. For permissions, e-mail:
journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/infdis/jix397 
PMCID: PMC5853595
PMID: 28968834  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
