

27. J Infect Dis. 2017 Mar 15;215(suppl_3):S111-S118. doi: 10.1093/infdis/jiw618.

Proviral Latency, Persistent Human Immunodeficiency Virus Infection, and the
Development of Latency Reversing Agents.

Margolis DM(1)(2)(3)(4), Archin NM(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)UNC HIV Cure Center.
(2)Department of Medicine, and.
(3)Department of Microbiology & Immunology, University of North Carolina at
Chapel Hill School of Medicine ; and.
(4)Department of Epidemiology, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill School
of Public Health.

Quiescent proviral genomes that persist during human immunodeficiency virus type 
1 (HIV-1) infection despite effective antiretroviral therapy (ART) can fuel
rebound viremia after ART interruption and is a central obstacle to the cure of
HIV infection. The induction of quiescent provirus is the goal of a new class of 
potential therapeutics, latency reversing agents (LRAs). The discovery,
development, and testing of HIV LRAs is a key part of current efforts to develop 
latency reversal and viral clearance strategies to eradicate established HIV
infection. The development of LRAs is burdened by many uncertainties that make
drug discovery difficult. The biology of HIV latency is complex and incompletely 
understood. Potential targets for LRAs are host factors, and the potential
toxicities of host-directed therapies in individuals that are otherwise
clinically stable may be unacceptable. Assays to measure latency reversal and
assess the effectiveness of potential therapeutics are complex and incompletely
validated. Despite these obstacles, novel LRAs are under development and
beginning to enter combination testing with viral clearance strategies. It is
hoped that the steady advances in the development of LRAs now being paired with
emerging immunotherapeutics to clear persistently infected cells will soon allow 
measurable clinical advances toward an HIV cure.

© The Author 2017. Published by Oxford University Press for the Infectious
Diseases Society of America. All rights reserved. For permissions, e-mail:
journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/infdis/jiw618 
PMCID: PMC5410986
PMID: 28520964  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
