

29. J Occup Health. 2017 May 25;59(3):304-308. doi: 10.1539/joh.16-0275-OP. Epub 2017
Apr 5.

A consensus for occupational health management of healthcare workers infected
with human immunodeficiency virus, hepatitis B virus, and / or hepatitis C virus.

Ishimaru T(1)(2)(3), Wada K(3)(4), Smith DR(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Health Management, Nishinihon Occupational Health Service
Center.
(2)Occupational Health Training Center, University of Occupational and
Environmental Health.
(3)The Research Group on Occupational Health for Health Care Workers, Japan
Society for Occupational Health.
(4)Bureau of International Health Cooperation, National Center for Global Health 
and Medicine.
(5)College of Public Health, Medical and Veterinary Sciences, James Cook
University.

Occupational health management plays an important role in the prevention of
provider-to-patient transmission in healthcare workers infected with human
immunodeficiency virus (HIV), hepatitis B virus (HBV), and/or hepatitis C virus
(HCV). Therefore, the Japan Society for Occupational Health's Research Group on
Occupational Health for Health Care Workers has proposed a consensus for the
management of healthcare workers infected with HIV, HBV, and/or HCV based on
recent evidence for each concerned group. The consensus recommends that: (1)
employers in medical institutions should establish a policy of respecting the
human rights of healthcare workers, management strategies for occupational blood 
exposure, and occupational health consultation; (2) occupational health staff
should appropriately assess the risk of provider-to-patient transmission of HIV, 
HBV, and/or HCV infection and rearrange their tasks if necessary. When conducting
risk assessment, occupational health staff should obtain informed consent and
then cooperate with the physician in charge as well as infection control experts 
in the workplace; (3) healthcare workers infected with HIV, HBV, and/or HCV
should disclose their employment to their treating physician and consult with
their doctor regarding the need for special considerations at work; and (4)
supervisors and colleagues in medical institutions should correctly understand
the risks of HIV, HBV, and HCV infection and should not engage in any behavior
that leads to discrimination against colleagues infected with HIV, HBV, and/or
HCV.

DOI: 10.1539/joh.16-0275-OP 
PMCID: PMC5478506
PMID: 28381816  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
