

40. AIDS Patient Care STDS. 2016 Jul;30(7):291-306. doi: 10.1089/apc.2016.0100.

Human Immunodeficiency Virus Immune Cell Receptors, Coreceptors, and Cofactors:
Implications for Prevention and Treatment.

Woodham AW(1), Skeate JG(1), Sanna AM(2), Taylor JR(1), Da Silva DM(2)(3), Cannon
PM(1), Kast WM(1)(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)1 Department of Molecular Microbiology and Immunology, University of Southern 
California , Los Angeles, California.
(2)2 Norris Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of Southern California , Los 
Angeles, California.
(3)3 Department of Obstetrics & Gynecology, University of Southern California ,
Los Angeles, California.

In the last three decades, extensive research on human immunodeficiency virus
(HIV) has highlighted its capability to exploit a variety of strategies to enter 
and infect immune cells. Although CD4(+) T cells are well known as the major HIV 
target, with infection occurring through the canonical combination of the cluster
of differentiation 4 (CD4) receptor and either the C-C chemokine receptor type 5 
(CCR5) or C-X-C chemokine receptor type 4 (CXCR4) coreceptors, HIV has also been 
found to enter other important immune cell types such as macrophages, dendritic
cells, Langerhans cells, B cells, and granulocytes. Interestingly, the expression
of distinct cellular cofactors partially regulates the rate in which HIV infects 
each distinct cell type. Furthermore, HIV can benefit from the acquisition of new
proteins incorporated into its envelope during budding events. While several
publications have investigated details of how HIV manipulates particular cell
types or subtypes, an up-to-date comprehensive review on HIV tropism for
different immune cells is lacking. Therefore, this review is meant to focus on
the different receptors, coreceptors, and cofactors that HIV exploits to enter
particular immune cells. Additionally, prophylactic approaches that have targeted
particular molecules associated with HIV entry and infection of different immune 
cells will be discussed. Unveiling the underlying cellular receptors and
cofactors that lead to HIV preference for specific immune cell populations is
crucial in identifying novel preventative/therapeutic targets for comprehensive
strategies to eliminate viral infection.

DOI: 10.1089/apc.2016.0100 
PMCID: PMC4948215
PMID: 27410493  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
