

7. Virol J. 2017 Oct 6;14(1):192. doi: 10.1186/s12985-017-0855-9.

Mucus and Mucins: do they have a role in the inhibition of the human
immunodeficiency virus?

Mall AS(1), Habte H(2), Mthembu Y(3), Peacocke J(3), de Beer C(4).

Author information: 
(1)Division of General Surgery, University of Cape Town and Immune Modulation and
Biotherapeutics Discovery, Boehringer- Ingelheim, Danbury, USA.
anwar.mall@uct.ac.za.
(2)Discipline of Medical Virology, University of Stellenbosch & Tygerberg
Hospital, Parow, South Africa.
(3)Division of General Surgery, University of Cape Town and Immune Modulation and
Biotherapeutics Discovery, Boehringer- Ingelheim, Danbury, USA.
(4)Department of Surgery, Division of General Surgery, University of Cape Town,
Observatory Cape, 7925, South Africa.

BACKGROUND: Mucins are large O-linked glycosylated proteins which give mucus
their gel-forming properties. There are indications that mucus and mucins in
saliva, breast milk and in the cervical plug inhibit the human immunodeficiency
virus (HIV-1) in an in vitro assay. Crude mucus gels form continuous layers on
the epithelial surfaces of the major internal tracts of the body and protect
these epithelial surfaces against aggressive luminal factors such as hydrochloric
acid and pepsin proteolysis in the stomach lumen, the movement of hard faecal
pellets in the colon at high pressure, the effects of shear against the vaginal
epithelium during intercourse and the presence of foreign substances in the
respiratory airways. Tumour-associated epitopes on mucins make them suitable as
immune-targets on malignant epithelial cells, rendering mucins important as
diagnostic and prognostic markers for various diseases, even influencing the
design of mucin-based vaccines. Sub-Saharan Africa has the highest prevalence of 
HIV-AIDS in the world. The main points of viral transmission are via the vaginal 
epithelium during sexual intercourse and mother-to-child transmission during
breast-feeding. There have been many studies showing that several body fluids
have components that prevent the transmission of HIV-1 from infected to
non-infected persons through various forms of contact. Crude saliva and its
purified mucins, MUC5B and MUC7, and the purified mucins from breast milk, MUC1
and MUC4 and pregnancy plug cervical mucus (MUC2, MUC5AC, MUC5B and MUC6),
inhibit HIV-1 in an in vitro assay. There are conflicting reports of whether
crude breast-milk inhibits HIV-1 in an in vitro assay. However studies with a
humanised BLT mouse show that breast-milk does inhibit HIV and that
breast-feeding is still advisable even amongst HIV-positive women in
under-resourced areas, preferably in conjunction with anti-retroviral treatment.
CONCLUSION: These findings raise questions of how such a naturally occurring
biological substance such as mucus, with remarkable protective properties of
epithelial surfaces against aggressive luminal factors in delicate locations,
could be used as a tool in the fight against HIV-AIDS, which has reached epidemic
proportions in sub-Saharan Africa.

DOI: 10.1186/s12985-017-0855-9 
PMCID: PMC5639604
PMID: 28985745  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
