

12. Biologicals. 2016 Nov;44(6):581-587. doi: 10.1016/j.biologicals.2016.08.005. Epub
2016 Oct 5.

Development of inactivated poliovirus vaccine from Sabin strains: A progress
report.

Okayasu H(1), Sein C(2), Hamidi A(3), Bakker WA(3), Sutter RW(2).

Author information: 
(1)Research and Product Development Team, Polio Eradication Department, The World
Health Organization, Geneva, Switzerland. Electronic address: okayasuh@who.int.
(2)Research and Product Development Team, Polio Eradication Department, The World
Health Organization, Geneva, Switzerland.
(3)Institute for Translational Vaccinology, Intravacc, Bilthoven, The
Netherlands.

The Global Polio Eradication Initiative (GPEI) has seen significant progress
since it began in 1988, largely due to the worldwide use of oral poliovirus
vaccine (OPV). In order to achieve polio eradication the global cessation of OPV 
is necessary because OPV contains live attenuated poliovirus, which in rare
circumstances could re-gain wild poliovirus (WPV) characteristics with potential 
to establish transmission. The GPEI endgame strategy for the period 2013-2018
recommends the globally synchronised sequential cessation of the Sabin strains
contained in the OPV, starting with type 2 Sabin. The withdrawal of Sabin type 2 
took place in April 2016, with the introduction of at least one dose of
inactivated poliovirus vaccine (IPV) as a risk mitigation strategy. The
introduction of IPV into 126 countries since 2013 has required a rapid scale-up
of IPV production by the two manufacturers supplying the global public sector
market. This scale-up has been fraught with challenges, resulting in reductions
of 40-50% of initial supply commitments. Consequently, 22 countries will not be
supplied until 2018, and another 23 countries will experience serious stock-outs.
In the last decade repeated calls-for-action were made to the global community to
invigorate their vision and investment in developing "new poliovirus vaccines"
including the development of IPV from less-virulent strains, such as Sabin-IPV
(S-IPV). The conventional Salk-IPV production is limited to high-income
industrialized-country manufacturers due to the containment requirements (i.e.,
high sanitation, low force-of-poliovirus-infection, and high population
immunity). The use of Sabin strains in the production of S-IPV carries a lower
biosafety risk, and was determined to be suitable for production in developing
countries, expanding the manufacturing base and making IPV more affordable and
accessible in the long term. Significant progress in the S-IPV has been made
since 2006. S-IPV is now licensed as S-IPV in Japan and as standalone S-IPV in
China, demonstrating the feasibility of this vaccine. In addition, production
process improvements can further reduce the cost of production. The latter are
critical to the economic success of this vaccine in the global market. We
summarize the progress made to date in S-IPV technology, the scientific data and 
economic evidence in support of S-IPV development.

Copyright © 2016 International Alliance for Biological Standardization. Published
by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.biologicals.2016.08.005 
PMID: 27720268  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
