

23. J Virol. 2015 Apr;89(8):4143-57. doi: 10.1128/JVI.03101-14. Epub 2015 Jan 28.

Nectin-like interactions between poliovirus and its receptor trigger
conformational changes associated with cell entry.

Strauss M(1), Filman DJ(1), Belnap DM(2), Cheng N(3), Noel RT(4), Hogle JM(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
(2)Laboratory of Structural Biology Research, National Institute of Arthritis and
Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda,
Maryland, USA Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Brigham Young University,
Provo, Utah, USA Departments of Biology and Biochemistry, University of Utah,
Salt Lake City, Utah, USA.
(3)Laboratory of Structural Biology Research, National Institute of Arthritis and
Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda,
Maryland, USA.
(4)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Brigham Young University, Provo,
Utah, USA.
(5)Department of Biological Chemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA james_hogle@hms.harvard.edu.

Poliovirus infection is initiated by attachment to a receptor on the cell surface
called Pvr or CD155. At physiological temperatures, the receptor catalyzes an
irreversible expansion of the virus to form an expanded form of the capsid called
the 135S particle. This expansion results in the externalization of the
myristoylated capsid protein VP4 and the N-terminal extension of the capsid
protein VP1, both of which become inserted into the cell membrane. Structures of 
the expanded forms of poliovirus and of several related viruses have recently
been reported. However, until now, it has been unclear how receptor binding
triggers viral expansion at physiological temperature. Here, we report poliovirus
in complex with an enzymatically partially deglycosylated form of the 3-domain
ectodomain of Pvr at a 4-Å resolution, as determined by cryo-electron microscopy.
The interaction of the receptor with the virus in this structure is reminiscent
of the interactions of Pvr with its natural ligands. At a low temperature, the
receptor induces very few changes in the structure of the virus, with the largest
changes occurring within the footprint of the receptor, and in a loop of the
internal protein VP4. Changes in the vicinity of the receptor include the
displacement of a natural lipid ligand (called "pocket factor"), demonstrating
that the loss of this ligand, alone, is not sufficient to induce particle
expansion. Finally, analogies with naturally occurring ligand binding in the
nectin family suggest which specific structural rearrangements in the
virus-receptor complex could help to trigger the irreversible expansion of the
capsid.IMPORTANCE: The cell-surface receptor (Pvr) catalyzes a large structural
change in the virus that exposes membrane-binding protein chains. We fitted known
atomic models of the virus and Pvr into three-dimensional experimental maps of
the receptor-virus complex. The molecular interactions we see between poliovirus 
and its receptor are reminiscent of the nectin family, by involving the burying
of otherwise-exposed hydrophobic groups. Importantly, poliovirus expansion is
regulated by the binding of a lipid molecule within the viral capsid. We show
that receptor binding either causes this molecule to be expelled or requires it, 
but that its loss is not sufficient to trigger irreversible expansion. Based on
our model, we propose testable hypotheses to explain how the viral shell becomes 
destabilized, leading to RNA uncoating. These findings give us a better
understanding of how poliovirus has evolved to exploit a natural process of its
host to penetrate the membrane barrier.

Copyright © 2015, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.03101-14 
PMCID: PMC4442392
PMID: 25631086  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
