

35. Pharm Pat Anal. 2012 Nov;1(5):589-99. doi: 10.4155/ppa.12.70.

Innovative IPV from attenuated Sabin poliovirus or newly designed alternative
seed strains.

Hamidi A(1), Bakker WA.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute for Public Health & the Environment (RIVM), Centre for
Infectious Disease Control (CIb), Vaccinology unit, P.O. Box 1, 3720 BA
Bilthoven, The Netherlands.

This article gives an overview of the patent literature related to innovative
inactivated polio vaccine (i-IPV) based on using Sabin poliovirus strains and
newly developed alternative recombinant poliovirus strains. This innovative
approach for IPV manufacturing is considered to attribute to the requirement for 
affordable IPV in the post-polio-eradication era, which is on the horizon.
Although IPV is a well-established vaccine, the number of patent applications in 
this field was seen to have significantly increased in the past decade.
Currently, regular IPV appears to be too expensive for universal use. Future
affordability may be achieved by using alternative cell lines, alternative virus 
seed strains, improved and optimized processes, dose sparing, or the use of
adjuvants. A relatively short-term option to achieve cost-price reduction is to
work on regular IPV, using wild-type poliovirus strains, or on Sabin-IPV, based
on using attenuated poliovirus strains. This price reduction can be achieved by
introducing efficiency in processing. There are also multiple opportunities to
work on dose sparing, for example, by using adjuvants or fractional doses.
Renewed interest in this field was clearly reflected in the number and diversity 
of patent applications. In a later stage, several innovative approaches may
become even more attractive, for example the use of recombinant virus strains or 
even a totally synthetic vaccine. Currently, such work is mainly carried out by
research institutes and universities and therefore clinical data are not
available.

DOI: 10.4155/ppa.12.70 
PMID: 24236927  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
