

50. J Virol Methods. 1987 Oct;18(1):25-36.

Intratypic differentiation of poliovirus strains by enzyme-linked immunosorbent
assay (ELISA): poliovirus type 2 and poliovirus type 3.

Glikmann G(1), Pedersen M, Petersen I.

Author information: 
(1)Ornithosis Department, Statens Seruminstitut, Copenhagen, Denmark.

A double-antibody sandwich ELISA was developed for the detection of antigenic
differences between wild and vaccine-derived strains of poliovirus type 2 and
poliovirus type 3. Antibodies were prepared in rabbits by immunization with
purified antigens of vaccine strains (type 2: Sabin P712, and type 3: Sabin Leon)
and wild type strains (type 2: MEF, and type 3: Pool 30). Immunoblotting analysis
of all antisera demonstrated that the IgG antibodies raised in rabbits have
specificity towards the main structural proteins (Vp1, Vp2 and Vp3) of
poliovirus. IgG fractions were purified from antisera by affinity chromatography,
on a protein A-activated Sepharose 4B column. Purified IgG antibodies were used
for coating of microtest plates (catching antibodies). The same reagents labelled
with horseradish peroxidase were used as conjugates, after cross-adsorption with 
antigens of the same type heterologous virus strains (strain-specific
conjugates). 29 poliovirus type 2 strains and 73 poliovirus type 3 strains
isolated from clinical samples, were differentiated intratypically, as
vaccine-derived or wild types, no intermediate strains were found and all samples
tested fell in two distinct (vaccine/wild) categories. As little as 40 ng of
poliovirus antigens was detected in stool samples from healthy children or from
polio patients cultivated in monkey kidney tissue cultures. Preparation of strain
specific conjugates did not require large amounts of poliovirus antigens. The
developed ELISA, which is economic and capable of (1) detection of low amounts of
poliovirus antigens in cultivated clinical samples, and (2) intratypic
differentiation of poliovirus antigens as either vaccine-derived or wild type, is
therefore well suited for large scale screening of poliovirus isolates.


PMID: 2826518  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
