

1003. Oncotarget. 2014 Sep 30;5(18):8583-601.

Epstein-Barr virus BALF3 mediates genomic instability and progressive malignancy 
in nasopharyngeal carcinoma.

Chiu SH(1), Wu CC(2), Fang CY(2), Yu SL(3), Hsu HY(2), Chow YH(3), Chen JY(1).

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Institute of Microbiology, College of Medicine, National Taiwan
University, Taipei, Taiwan. National Institute of Cancer Research, National
Health Research Institutes, Miaoli, Taiwan.
(2)National Institute of Cancer Research, National Health Research Institutes,
Miaoli, Taiwan.
(3)National Institute of Infectious Diseases and Vaccinology, National Health
Research Institutes, Miaoli, Taiwan.

Nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC) is a head and neck cancer prevalent throughout
Southern China and Southeast Asia. Patient death following relapse after primary 
treatment remains all too common but the cause of NPC relapse is unclear.
Clinical and epidemiological studies have revealed the high correlation among NPC
development, Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) reactivation and host genomic instability. 
Previously, recurrent EBV reactivation was shown to cause massive genetic
alterations and enhancement of tumor progression in NPC cells and these may be
required for NPC relapse. Here, EBV BALF3 has the ability to induce micronuclei
and DNA strand breaks. After recurrent expression of BALF3 in NPC cells, genomic 
copy number aberrations, determined by array-based comparative genomic
hybridization, had accumulated to a significant extent and tumorigenic features, 
such as cell migration, cell invasion and spheroid formation, increased with the 
rounds of induction. In parallel experiments, cells after highly recurrent
induction developed into larger tumor nodules than control cells when inoculated 
into NOD/SCID mice. Furthermore, RNA microarrays showed that differential
expression of multiple cancer capability-related genes and oncogenes increased
with recurrent BALF3 expression and these changes correlated with genetic
aberrations. Therefore, EBV BALF3 is a potential factor that mediates the impact 
of EBV on NPC relapse.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.2323 
PMCID: PMC4226706
PMID: 25261366  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
