

1024. J Clin Oncol. 2016 Dec;34(34):4132-4141. Epub 2016 Oct 31.

Human Papillomavirus Drives Tumor Development Throughout the Head and Neck:
Improved Prognosis Is Associated With an Immune Response Largely Restricted to
the Oropharynx.

Chakravarthy A(1), Henderson S(1), Thirdborough SM(1), Ottensmeier CH(1), Su
X(1), Lechner M(1), Feber A(1), Thomas GJ(1), Fenton TR(1).

Author information: 
(1)Ankur Chakravarthy, Stephen Henderson, Matt Lechner, Andrew Feber, and Tim R. 
Fenton, UCL Cancer Institute, University College London, London; Stephen M.
Thirdborough, Christian H. Ottensmeier, and Gareth J. Thomas, University of
Southampton, Southampton, United Kingdom; Xiaoping Su, The University of Texas MD
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX.

Purpose In squamous cell carcinomas of the head and neck (HNSCC), the increasing 
incidence of oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinomas (OPSCCs) is attributable to
human papillomavirus (HPV) infection. Despite commonly presenting at late stage, 
HPV-driven OPSCCs are associated with improved prognosis compared with
HPV-negative disease. HPV DNA is also detectable in nonoropharyngeal (non-OPSCC),
but its pathogenic role and clinical significance are unclear. The objectives of 
this study were to determine whether HPV plays a causal role in non-OPSCC and to 
investigate whether HPV confers a survival benefit in these tumors. Methods
Meta-analysis was used to build a cross-tissue gene-expression signature for
HPV-driven cancer. Classifiers trained by machine-learning approaches were used
to predict the HPV status of 520 HNSCCs profiled by The Cancer Genome Atlas
project. DNA methylation data were similarly used to classify 464 HNSCCs and
these analyses were integrated with genomic, histopathology, and survival data to
permit a comprehensive comparison of HPV transcript-positive OPSCC and non-OPSCC.
Results HPV-driven tumors accounted for 4.1% of non-OPSCCs. Regardless of
anatomic site, HPV+ HNSCCs shared highly similar gene expression and DNA
methylation profiles; nonkeratinizing, basaloid histopathological features; and
lack of TP53 or CDKN2A alterations. Improved overall survival, however, was
largely restricted to HPV-driven OPSCCs, which were associated with increased
levels of tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes compared with HPV-driven non-OPSCCs.
Conclusion Our analysis identified a causal role for HPV in transcript-positive
non-OPSCCs throughout the head and neck. Notably, however, HPV-driven non-OPSCCs 
display a distinct immune microenvironment and clinical behavior compared with
HPV-driven OPSCCs.

DOI: 10.1200/JCO.2016.68.2955 
PMCID: PMC5477823 [Available on 2017-07-01]
PMID: 27863190  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
