

1036. Oncotarget. 2016 Jun 14;7(24):35832-35842. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.9028.

Similar cisplatin sensitivity of HPV-positive and -negative HNSCC cell lines.

Busch CJ(1), Becker B(1)(2), Kriegs M(2), Gatzemeier F(2), Krüger K(3),
Möckelmann N(1), Fritz G(3), Petersen C(4), Knecht R(1), Rothkamm K(2), Rieckmann
T(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology and Head and Neck Surgery, University Medical
Center Hamburg Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany.
(2)Laboratory of Radiobiology and Experimental Radiooncology, University Medical 
Center Hamburg Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany.
(3)Institute of Toxicology, University Medical Center Düsseldorf, Düsseldorf,
Germany.
(4)Department of Radiotherapy and Radiation Oncology, University Medical Center
Hamburg Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany.

Patients with HPV-positive head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) show
better survival rates than those with HPV-negative HNSCC. While an enhanced
radiosensitivity of HPV-positive tumors is clearly evident from single modality
treatment, cisplatin is never administered as monotherapy and therefore its
contribution to the enhanced cure rates of HPV-positive HNSCC is not known. Both 
cisplatin and radiotherapy can cause severe irreversible side effects and
therefore various clinical studies are currently testing deintensified regimes
for patients with HPV-positive HNSCC. One strategy is to omit cisplatin-based
chemotherapy or replace it by less toxic treatments but the risk assessment of
these approaches remains difficult. In this study we have compared the cytotoxic 
effects of cisplatin in a panel of HPV-positive and -negative HNSCC cell lines
alone and when combined with radiation.While cisplatin-treated HPV-positive
strains showed a slightly stronger inhibition of proliferation, there was no
difference regarding colony formation. Cellular responses to the drug, namely
cell cycle distribution, apoptosis and γH2AX-induction did not differ between the
two entities but assessment of cisplatin-DNA-adducts suggests differences
regarding the mechanisms that determine cisplatin sensitivity. Combining
cisplatin with radiation, we generally observed an additive but only in a
minority of strains from both entities a clear synergistic effect on colony
formation. In summary, HPV-positive and -negative HNSCC cells were equally
sensitive to cisplatin. Therefore replacing cisplatin may be feasible but the
substituting agent should be of similar efficacy in order not to jeopardize the
high cure rates for HPV-positive HNSCC.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.9028 
PMCID: PMC5094966
PMID: 27127883  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
