

1038. PLoS One. 2014 Feb 24;9(2):e88718. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0088718. eCollection
2014.

Comprehensive analysis of HPV16 integration in OSCC reveals no significant impact
of physical status on viral oncogene and virally disrupted human gene expression.

Olthof NC(1), Speel EJ(2), Kolligs J(3), Haesevoets A(4), Henfling M(4),
Ramaekers FC(4), Preuss SF(5), Drebber U(6), Wieland U(7), Silling S(7), Lam
WL(8), Vucic EA(8), Kremer B(9), Klussmann JP(10), Huebbers CU(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology and Head and Neck Surgery, GROW - School for
Oncology and Developmental Biology, Maastricht University Medical Centre,
Maastricht, the Netherlands ; Department of Molecular Cell Biology, GROW - School
for Oncology and Developmental Biology, Maastricht University Medical Centre,
Maastricht, the Netherlands.
(2)Department of Molecular Cell Biology, GROW - School for Oncology and
Developmental Biology, Maastricht University Medical Centre, Maastricht, the
Netherlands ; Department of Pathology, GROW - School for Oncology and
Developmental Biology, Maastricht University Medical Centre, Maastricht, the
Netherlands.
(3)Jean-Uhrmacher-Institute for Otorhinolaryngological Research, University of
Cologne, Cologne, Germany.
(4)Department of Molecular Cell Biology, GROW - School for Oncology and
Developmental Biology, Maastricht University Medical Centre, Maastricht, the
Netherlands.
(5)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, University Hospital 
of Cologne, Cologne, Germany.
(6)Institute for Pathology, University Hospital of Cologne, Cologne, Germany.
(7)Institute of Virology, National Reference Centre for Papilloma- and
Polyomaviruses, University Hospital of Cologne, Cologne, Germany.
(8)Department of Integrative Oncology, British Columbia Cancer Research Centre,
Vancouver, Canada.
(9)Department of Otorhinolaryngology and Head and Neck Surgery, GROW - School for
Oncology and Developmental Biology, Maastricht University Medical Centre,
Maastricht, the Netherlands.
(10)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, University Hospital
of Giessen, Giessen, Germany.

Infection with high-risk human papillomavirus (HPV) type 16 is an independent
risk factor for the development of oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinomas (OSCC).
However, it is unclear whether viral integration is an essential hallmark in the 
carcinogenic process of OSCC and whether HPV integration correlates with the
level of viral gene transcription and influences the expression of disrupted host
genes. We analyzed 75 patients with OSCC. HPV16-positivity was proven by
p16(INK4A) immunohistochemistry, PCR and FISH. Viral integration was examined
using DIPS- as well as APOT-PCR. Viral E2, E6 and E7 gene expression levels were 
quantified by quantitative reverse transcriptase (RT-q)PCR. Expression levels of 
7 human genes disrupted by the virus were extracted from mRNA expression
profiling data of 32 OSCCs. Viral copy numbers were assessed by qPCR in 73
tumors. We identified 37 HPV16-human fusion products indicating viral integration
in 29 (39%) OSCC. In the remaining tumors (61%) only episome-derived PCR products
were detected. When comparing OSCC with or without an integration-derived fusion 
product, we did not find significant differences in the mean RNA expression of
viral genes E2, E6 and E7 or the viral copy numbers per cell, nor did the RNA
expression of the HPV-disrupted genes differ from either group of OSCC. In
conclusion, our data do not support the hypothesis that integration affects the
levels of viral and/or HPV-disrupted human gene transcripts. Thus constitutive,
rather than a high level, of expression of oncogene transcripts appears to be
required in HPV-related OSCC.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0088718 
PMCID: PMC3933331
PMID: 24586376  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
