

1055. Cell Death Dis. 2014 Feb 27;5:e1091. doi: 10.1038/cddis.2014.62.

Impact of human papilloma virus infection on the response of head and neck
cancers to anti-epidermal growth factor receptor antibody therapy.

Pogorzelski M(1), Ting S(2), Gauler TC(1), Breitenbuecher F(1), Vossebein I(1),
Hoffarth S(1), Markowetz J(1), Lang S(3), Bergmann C(3), Brandau S(3), Jawad
JA(4), Schmid KW(2), Schuler M(5), Kasper S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, West German Cancer Center, University Hospital
Essen, Essen, Germany.
(2)Institute of Pathology, West German Cancer Center, University Hospital Essen, 
Essen, Germany.
(3)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, West German Cancer Center, University
Hospital Essen, Essen, Germany.
(4)Department of Radiotherapy, West German Cancer Center, University Hospital
Essen, University Duisburg-Essen, Essen, Germany.
(5)1] Department of Medical Oncology, West German Cancer Center, University
Hospital Essen, Essen, Germany [2] German Cancer Consortium (DKTK), Heidelberg,
Germany.

Infection with human papillomaviruses (HPVs) characterizes a distinct subset of
head and neck squamous cell cancers (HNSCCs). HPV-positive HNSCC preferentially
affect the oropharynx and tonsils. Localized HPV-positive HNSCCs have a favorable
prognosis and treatment outcome. However, the impact of HPV in advanced or
metastatic HNSCC remains to be defined. In particular, it is unclear whether HPV 
modulates the response to cetuximab, an antibody targeting the epidermal growth
factor receptor (EGFR), which is a mainstay of treatment of advanced HNSCC. To
this end, we have examined the sensitivity of HPV-positive and -negative HNSCC
models to cetuximab and cytotoxic drugs in vitro and in vivo. In addition, we
have stably expressed the HPV oncogenes E6 and E7 in cetuximab-sensitive cancer
cell lines to specifically investigate their role in the antibody response. The
endogenous HPV status or the expression of HPV oncogenes had no significant
impact on cetuximab-mediated suppression of EGFR signaling and proliferation in
vitro. Cetuximab effectively inhibited the growth of E6- and E7-expressing tumors
grafted in NOD/SCID mice. In support, formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded tumor
samples from cetuximab-treated patients with recurrent or metastatic HNSCC were
probed for p16(INK4a) expression, an established biomarker of HPV infection.
Response rates (45.5% versus 45.5%) and median progression-free survival (97
versus 92 days) following cetuximab-based therapy were similar in patients with
p16(INK4A)-positive and p16(INK4A)-negative tumors. In conclusion, HPV oncogenes 
do not modulate the anti-EGFR antibody response in HSNCC. Cetuximab treatment
should be administered independently of HPV status.

DOI: 10.1038/cddis.2014.62 
PMCID: PMC3944273
PMID: 24577089  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
