

1067. JAMA Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2015 Jan;141(1):78-83. doi:
10.1001/jamaoto.2014.2826.

Adult-onset recurrent respiratory papillomatosis: a review of disease
pathogenesis and implications for patient counseling.

Taliercio S(1), Cespedes M(2), Born H(1), Ruiz R(1), Roof S(1), Amin MR(1),
Branski RC(1).

Author information: 
(1)NYU Voice Center, Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, New York
University School of Medicine, New York.
(2)Department of Medicine, New York University School of Medicine, New York, New 
York.

IMPORTANCE: A new diagnosis of adult-onset recurrent respiratory papillomatosis
(AO-RRP) prompts many questions related to disease acquisition, course, and
transmission. Recent attention to the human papillomavirus (HPV), along with
emerging data on AO-RRP, provides a foundation for patient counseling.
OBJECTIVE: To provide a framework for these discussions, including an overview of
the current literature on HPV-mediated disease across organs.
EVIDENCE REVIEW: The peer-reviewed literature was culled to provide a
comprehensive review encompassing AO-RRP and anogenital papilloma, as well as
general HPV virology and pathophysiology. PubMed and Google Scholar databases
were searched from 1975 to July 2014.
FINDINGS: Most HPV infections in healthy adults are cleared within 2 years
without clinical significance. Adult-onset RRP is a rare manifestation of HPV and
may be homologous to anogenital HPV, which is highly transmissible between sexual
partners. Horizontal transmission of AO-RRP has not been characterized. Our
laboratory, however, recently found that nearly 100% of patients with AO-RRP had 
concurrent oral cavity HPV infection. Historically, an increased number of oral
sex partners was thought to be associated with AO-RRP, but recent data from our
group did not corroborate this finding. Recent data also question the dogma that 
smoking and laryngopharyngeal reflux play a role in recidivistic disease.
Management of AO-RRP is often symptom based and includes lesion excision or
ablation with adjuvant therapies including cidofovir for refractory cases.
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: Recurrent respiratory papillomatosis may be related to
a new or latent HPV infection, potentially obtained at birth, and the
mechanism(s) underlying the progression from HPV infection to RRP remains
unknown. Recommendations with regard to sexual practices in patients with AO-RRP 
cannot be made at this time. Unlike human immunodeficiency virus, patients with
AO-RRP are not obligated to discuss infection status with partners. Despite the
nebulous nature of the disease, clinicians should be a resource to discuss the
current state of the literature with both the patient and partner.

DOI: 10.1001/jamaoto.2014.2826 
PMID: 25393901  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
