

1081. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2014 May 1;89(1):38-48. doi:
10.1016/j.ijrobp.2013.09.034.

Genetic susceptibility to head and neck squamous cell carcinoma.

Lacko M(1), Braakhuis BJ(2), Sturgis EM(3), Boedeker CC(4), Suárez C(5), Rinaldo 
A(6), Ferlito A(6), Takes RP(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Maastricht University
Medical Center, Maastricht, The Netherlands.
(2)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, VU University Medical
Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(3)Department of Head and Neck Surgery and Department of Epidemiology, The
University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas.
(4)Department of Otorhinolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery,
Albert-Ludwigs-University, Freiburg, Germany and Department of
Otorhinolaryngology - Head and Neck Surgery, HELIOS Hanseklinikum Stralsund,
Stralsund, Germany.
(5)Department of Otolaryngology, Hospital Universitario Central de Asturias,
Oviedo, Spain; Instituto Universitario de Oncología del Principado de Asturias,
Oviedo, Spain.
(6)ENT Clinic, University of Udine, Udine, Italy.
(7)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Radboud University
Nijmegen Medical Center, Nijmegen, The Netherlands. Electronic address:
robert.takes@radboudumc.nl.

Head-and-neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) is the sixth most common cancer
worldwide, and its incidence is growing. Although environmental carcinogens and
carcinogenic viruses are the main etiologic factors, genetic predisposition
obviously plays a risk-modulating role, given that not all individuals exposed to
these carcinogens experience the disease. This review highlights some aspects of 
genetic susceptibility to HNSCC: among others, genetic polymorphisms in
biotransformation enzymes, DNA repair pathway, apoptotic pathway, human
papillomavirus-related pathways, mitochondrial polymorphisms, and polymorphism
related to the bilirubin-metabolized pathway. Furthermore, epigenetic variations,
familial forms of HNSCC, functional assays for HNSCC risk assessment, and the
implications and perspectives of research on genetic susceptibility in HNSCC are 
discussed.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijrobp.2013.09.034 
PMID: 24725688  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
