

1083. J Am Dent Assoc. 2011 Aug;142(8):905-14.

Human papillomavirus infections in the oral mucosa.

Rautava J(1), Syrjänen S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Pathology and Oral Radiology, Institute of Dentistry,
Faculty of Medicine, University of Turku, Finland.

Comment in
    J Am Dent Assoc. 2012 May;143(5):440.

BACKGROUND: Public awareness of human papillomavirus (HPV) as the causal agent of
cervical cancer and of the availability of HPV vaccines has increased. As a
result, more patients are asking their dentists about oral HPV infection and its 
prevention by means of vaccination. Parents of pediatric dental patients also may
be concerned when their children have HPV-associated oral lesions, because HPV
infection still often is considered a purely sexually transmitted disease. In
this review, the authors provide the latest information for dental professionals 
about HPV infection in the oral mucosa and in general.
TYPES OF STUDIES REVIEWED: The authors searched PubMed for all studies regarding 
HPV infection in the oral mucosa, and they reviewed relevant publications
focusing exclusively on HPV infections of the oral cavity. In selecting studies
for review, the authors made a clear distinction between studies regarding HPV
infections in the mouth and those regarding HPV infection in the oropharynx or in
other head and neck sites.
RESULTS: HPV can infect oral mucosa. A subgroup of oral cancer clearly is
associated with HPV. Oral HPV infection is transmitted sexually but also can be
transmitted from mouth to mouth and vertically from an infected mother during
delivery.
CONCLUSIONS AND CLINICAL IMPLICATIONS: Persistent HPV infection in the oral
mucosa might increase the risk of developing oral cancer. Regular and meticulous 
clinical examination is the dentist's most important tool in detecting
HPV-associated changes in the oral mucosae. HPV-associated oral cancer may affect
a population younger than that typically affected by HPV-independent oral cancer.
Alcohol and tobacco use increase the risk of developing oral cancer, so good
practice includes encouraging patients to avoid these habits. The available HPV
vaccines cover the HPV genotypes found most commonly in the oral mucosa, but
their protective effect against oral cancer remains to be elucidated.

Copyright © 2011 American Dental Association. All rights reserved.


PMID: 21804057  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
