

111. J Virol. 2015 Aug;89(15):7944-54. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00757-15. Epub 2015 May 20.

Interferon Beta and Interferon Alpha 2a Differentially Protect Head and Neck
Cancer Cells from Vesicular Stomatitis Virus-Induced Oncolysis.

Westcott MM(1), Liu J(2), Rajani K(3), D'Agostino R Jr(4), Lyles DS(3), Porosnicu
M(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Wake Forest School of Medicine,
Winston-Salem, North Carolina, USA.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, Section on Hematology and Oncology, Wake
Forest School of Medicine, Winston-Salem, North Carolina, USA.
(3)Department of Biochemistry, Wake Forest School of Medicine, Winston-Salem,
North Carolina, USA.
(4)Department of Biostatistical Sciences, Wake Forest School of Medicine,
Winston-Salem, North Carolina, USA.
(5)Department of Internal Medicine, Section on Hematology and Oncology, Wake
Forest School of Medicine, Winston-Salem, North Carolina, USA
mporosni@wakehealth.edu.

Oncolytic viruses (OV) preferentially kill cancer cells due in part to defects in
their antiviral responses upon exposure to type I interferons (IFNs). However,
IFN responsiveness of some tumor cells confers resistance to OV treatment. The
human type I IFNs include one IFN-β and multiple IFN-α subtypes that share the
same receptor but are capable of differentially inducing biological responses.
The role of individual IFN subtypes in promoting tumor cell resistance to OV is
addressed here. Two human IFNs which have been produced for clinical use, IFN-α2a
and IFN-β, were compared for activity in protecting human head and neck squamous 
cell carcinoma (HNSCC) lines from oncolysis by vesicular stomatitis virus (VSV). 
Susceptibility of HNSCC lines to killing by VSV varied. VSV infection induced
increased production of IFN-β in resistant HNSCC cells. When added exogenously,
IFN-β was significantly more effective at protecting HNSCC cells from VSV
oncolysis than was IFN-α2a. In contrast, normal keratinocytes and endothelial
cells were protected equivalently by both IFN subtypes. Differential
responsiveness of tumor cells to IFN-α and -β was further supported by the
finding that autocrine IFN-β but not IFN-α promoted survival of HNSCC cells
during persistent VSV infection. Therefore, IFN-α and -β differentially affect
VSV oncolysis, justifying the evaluation and comparison of IFN subtypes for use
in combination with VSV therapy. Pairing VSV with IFN-α2a may enhance selectivity
of oncolytic VSV therapy for HNSCC by inhibiting VSV replication in normal cells 
without a corresponding inhibition in cancer cells.IMPORTANCE: There has been a
great deal of progress in the development of oncolytic viruses. However, a major 
problem is that individual cancers vary in their sensitivity to oncolytic
viruses. In many cases this is due to differences in their production and
response to interferons (IFNs). The experiments described here compared the
responses of head and neck squamous cell carcinoma cell lines to two IFN
subtypes, IFN-α2a and IFN-β, in protection from oncolytic vesicular stomatitis
virus. We found that IFN-α2a was significantly less protective for cancer cells
than was IFN-β, whereas normal cells were equivalently protected by both IFNs.
These results suggest that from a therapeutic standpoint, selectivity for cancer 
versus normal cells may be enhanced by pairing VSV with IFN-α2a.

Copyright © 2015, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.00757-15 
PMCID: PMC4505650
PMID: 25995245  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
