

1110. Oral Oncol. 2010 Jul;46(7):492-6. doi: 10.1016/j.oraloncology.2010.02.013. Epub
2010 Mar 12.

Refining the diagnosis of oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma using human
papillomavirus testing.

Robinson M(1), Sloan P, Shaw R.

Author information: 
(1)School of Dental Sciences, Newcastle University, UK. max.robinson@ncl.ac.uk
<max.robinson@ncl.ac.uk>

There is accumulating evidence that oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinomas (SCCs)
that harbour oncogenic human papillomavirus (HPV) are biologically distinct and
have a better prognosis. This information is a persuasive argument for the
identification of these cancers in clinical practice. The concept of 'HPV
related' SCC should be underpinned by knowledge that the malignant cells harbour 
a high risk HPV genotype and there is evidence of oncogenic viral protein
expression with effects on cell signalling pathways. For satisfactory
classification in clinical practice HPV tests should reliably work on fixed cells
and tissue. There is evidence that detection of high risk HPV by consensus
polymerase chain reaction (PCR) alone is insufficient to accurately classify
tumours. However, there is convincing evidence that the detection of p16 protein 
by immunohistochemistry can be used as a surrogate marker for the elaboration of 
oncogenic HPV proteins. Recently, there have been calls for standardisation of
HPV testing in head and neck cancers and two diagnostic algorithms have emerged: 
the first advocates screening for p16 by immunohistochemistry followed by
detection of HPV DNA by in situ hybridisation: the second recommends detection of
p16 followed by consensus PCR. The majority of pathology laboratories have the
capability of delivering the first algorithm. Furthermore, the techniques
employed are automated and are subject to stringent quality assurance measures;
features that can deliver routine, accurate and cost effective HPV testing for
oropharyngeal cancers.

DOI: 10.1016/j.oraloncology.2010.02.013 
PMID: 20227331  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
