
Conflict of interest statement: The author reports no conflicts of interest in
this work.


1140. Vopr Virusol. 2016;61(5):205-12.

Diagnostic value of the Epstein-Barr virus serological markers in patients with
nasopharyngeal carcinoma in cases of undetectable primary tumor location.

Gurtsevitch VE, Senyuta NB, Lomaya MV, Ignatova AV, Dushenkina TE, Repkina IA,
Pavlovskaya AI, Mudunov AM.

The goal of this work was to describe a method for diagnosis of the
non-keratinizing nasopharyngeal carcinoma (nNPC) in cases of the undetectable
primary tumor location. The method is based on evaluation of IgG and IgA antibody
levels to the capsid (VCA) and early antigens (EA) of the Epstein-Barr virus
(EBV). The diagnosis of nNPC is established by a so-called decision rule. The
latter was created by mathematical processing of the method of multifactor
analysis of the results of anti-EBV antibody testing of 72 patients with
clinically and morphologically confirmed nNPC and 72 patients with other head and
neck benign tumors (OHNT) not associated with EBV, which were tested as a control
group. The diagnostic value of the decision rule which was tested in the group of
77 patients with confirmed nNPC and 231 patients of a control group was high. The
numbers of false negative and false positive cases were equal to 5.2% (4/77) and 
6.5% (17/231), respectively. Among 32 patients with undetectable primary tumors
the decision rule was able to identify 11 cases of nNPC. This diagnosis later was
confirmed by morphological and instrumental methods of study. Only in two cases, 
false negative result was obtained (2/32; 6.3%) indicating that the serological
diagnostics of nNPC with the decision rule is highly specific but not exact.
Thus, the data obtained allowed us to conclude that the serological testing of
EBV specific antibody evaluated by the decision rule can be recommended as an
important test supplementing the standard methods of pdNPC diagnostics including 
cases with undetected primary tumor location.


PMID: 29323852  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
