

1146. Curr Opin Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2014 Apr;22(2):90-4. doi:
10.1097/MOO.0000000000000030.

What are the implications of human papillomavirus status in oropharyngeal tumors 
for clinical practice?

Klozar J(1), Tachezy R.

Author information: 
(1)aDepartment of Otorhinolaryngology and Head and Neck Surgery, Faculty of
Medicine, Charles University in Prague, Motol University Hospital bDepartment of 
Experimental Virology, Institute of Hematology and Blood Transfusion, Prague,
Czech Republic.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Human papillomavirus (HPV) status itself is an important and
very probably the strongest prognostic factor in head and neck cancer. Because of
the prognostic advantage of patients with HPV-positive cancers, the issue of the 
quality of life of survivors has become increasingly important. The possibility
of treatment de-escalation in patients with virally induced tumors is being
considered. Many challenges have to be addressed in order to integrate HPV status
in the routine decision-making in patients with oropharyngeal cancer. The present
review discusses the standardization of detection methods suitable for clinical
use and the differences in predictive parameters between patients with
HPV-positive and HPV-negative tumors.
RECENT FINDINGS: The gold standard for the identification of patients with
oropharyngeal tumors etiologically linked to HPV infection is undoubtedly the
detection of HPV 16 E6/E7 mRNA. The detection of a surrogate marker of active
viral infection, p16ink4a, has a low sensitivity when used alone and must
therefore be combined with the detection of HPV DNA or HPV-specific antibodies.
The detailed knowledge of the importance of specific prognostic parameters is
crucial in the choice of treatment. Nodal staging is probably much less important
in HPV-positive cancers.
SUMMARY: It is of great importance to implement standardized testing for the
identification of patients with HPV-induced oropharyngeal tumors. The treatment
decision models in HPV-positive tumors have to take into account the probably
different prognostic value of nodal parameters. Before introducing treatment
de-escalation in patients with virally induced tumors into clinical practice,
more research and clinical studies are needed.

DOI: 10.1097/MOO.0000000000000030 
PMID: 24492854  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
