

1165. Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2009 Nov;135(11):1137-46. doi:
10.1001/archoto.2009.159.

Immune response during therapy with cisplatin or radiation for human
papillomavirus-related head and neck cancer.

Spanos WC(1), Nowicki P, Lee DW, Hoover A, Hostager B, Gupta A, Anderson ME, Lee 
JH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Roy J. and Lucille A.
Carver College of Medicine, University of Iowa, Iowa City, USA.

BACKGROUND: Human papillomavirus (HPV) is the most identifiable cause of head and
neck squamous cell cancer (HNSCC). Compared with HPV-negative HNSCC, HPV-positive
HNSCC presents at an advanced stage but with significantly better survival. We
created a syngeneic mouse model of HPV-positive and HPV-negative HNSCC by
transforming mouse primary tonsil epithelial cells with either HPV oncogenes or a
nonantigenic RNA interference strategy that affects similar oncogenic pathways.
OBJECTIVES: To examine the effect of radiation therapy on HPV-positive and
HPV-negative tumors in immune-competent and immune-incompetent mice and to
examine responses in human cancer cell lines.
DESIGN: Prospective in vivo murine model.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Survival and tumor growth.
RESULTS: For human and murine transformed cell lines, HPV-positive cells were
more resistant to radiation and cisplatin therapy compared with HPV-negative
cells. In vivo, HPV-positive tumors were more sensitive to radiation, with
complete clearance at 20 Gy, compared with their HPV-negative counterparts, which
showed persistent growth. Cisplatin in vivo cleared HPV-positive tumors but not
HPV-negative tumors. However, neither radiation or cisplatin therapy cured
immune-incompetent mice. Adoptive transfer of wild-type immune cells into
immune-incompetent mice restored HPV-positive tumor clearance with cisplatin
therapy.
CONCLUSIONS: The HPV-positive tumors are not more curable based on increased
epithelial sensitivity to cisplatin or radiation therapy. Instead, radiation and 
cisplatin induce an immune response to this antigenic cancer. The implications of
these results may lead to novel therapies that enhance tumor eradication for
HPV-positive cancers.

DOI: 10.1001/archoto.2009.159 
PMID: 19917928  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
