

119. J Virol. 2013 Aug;87(16):8916-26. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00340-13. Epub 2013 Jun 5.

Landscape of DNA virus associations across human malignant cancers: analysis of
3,775 cases using RNA-Seq.

Khoury JD(1), Tannir NM, Williams MD, Chen Y, Yao H, Zhang J, Thompson EJ; TCGA
Network, Meric-Bernstam F, Medeiros LJ, Weinstein JN, Su X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematopathology, MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas, USA.
jkhoury@mdanderson.org

Elucidation of tumor-DNA virus associations in many cancer types has enhanced our
knowledge of fundamental oncogenesis mechanisms and provided a basis for cancer
prevention initiatives. RNA-Seq is a novel tool to comprehensively assess such
associations. We interrogated RNA-Seq data from 3,775 malignant neoplasms in The 
Cancer Genome Atlas database for the presence of viral sequences. Viral
integration sites were also detected in expressed transcripts using a novel
approach. The detection capacity of RNA-Seq was compared to available clinical
laboratory data. Human papillomavirus (HPV) transcripts were detected using
RNA-Seq analysis in head-and-neck squamous cell carcinoma, uterine endometrioid
carcinoma, and squamous cell carcinoma of the lung. Detection of HPV by RNA-Seq
correlated with detection by in situ hybridization and immunohistochemistry in
squamous cell carcinoma tumors of the head and neck. Hepatitis B virus and
Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) were detected using RNA-Seq in hepatocellular carcinoma 
and gastric carcinoma tumors, respectively. Integration sites of viral genes and 
oncogenes were detected in cancers harboring HPV or hepatitis B virus but not in 
EBV-positive gastric carcinoma. Integration sites of expressed viral transcripts 
frequently involved known coding areas of the host genome. No DNA virus
transcripts were detected in acute myeloid leukemia, cutaneous melanoma, low- and
high-grade gliomas of the brain, and adenocarcinomas of the breast, colon and
rectum, lung, prostate, ovary, kidney, and thyroid. In conclusion, this study
provides a large-scale overview of the landscape of DNA viruses in human
malignant cancers. While further validation is necessary for specific cancer
types, our findings highlight the utility of RNA-Seq in detecting
tumor-associated DNA viruses and identifying viral integration sites that may
unravel novel mechanisms of cancer pathogenesis.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.00340-13 
PMCID: PMC3754044
PMID: 23740984  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
