

1220. Clin Lab. 2015;61(10):1435-44.

Adenovirus-Mediated E2F-1 Gene Transfer Augments Gemcitabine-Induced Apoptosis in
Human Colon Cancer Cells.

Lin Z, Ren N, Jiang Y, Xu W, Shi Y, Liu G.

BACKGROUND: E2F-1 is a transcription factor that stimulates cellular
proliferation and cell cycle progression. E2F-1 alone is sufficient to stimulate 
cells to initiate DNA synthesis, and this unscheduled entry into S phase is a
potent trigger of apoptosis. Gemcitabine, a novel pyrimidine analogue with
structural and metabolic similarities to cytarabine, also can efficiently induce 
apoptosis, especially for cancer cells that are already in S phase. Gemcitabine
has established antitumor activity against solid tumors, including head and neck,
ovarian, and non-small cell lung cancers. Therefore, we hypothesized that
exogenous E2F-1 expression could accumulate cells in the S phase and thus
sensitize them to gemcitabine.
METHODS: We constructed an adenoviral vector (AdCMVE2F-1) to transduce the
exogenous E2F-1 gene into human cancer cells. Infection of human colon cancer
cells with AdCMVE2F-1 resulted in the overexpression of E2F-1 mRNA and protein in
a dose-dependent manner and consequently induced accumulation in S phase as
measured by FACS analysis. To assess the synergistic antitumor effect of
AdCMVE2F-1 and gemcitabine, the human colon cancer cel lines SW620, DLD-1, and
LoVo were infected with AdCMVE2F-1 at various multiplicities of infection and
then exposed to various concentrations of gemcitabine 24 hours after infection.
RESULT: Isobologram analysis showed that E2F-1-transduced cancer cells exhibited 
higher sensitivity to gemcitabine treatment compared to control virus-infected
cells. Treatment with AdCMVE2F-1 plus gemcitabine enhanced endogenous p53
expression in LoVo cells, which contain wild-type p53; however, the finding that 
the synergistic effect can also be observed in mutant p53-expressing SW620 and
DLD-1 cells suggests that wild-type p53 function may not be necessary for the
therapeutic effects of this drug combination. Conclusions: Our data demonstrate
that overexpression of ectopic E2F-1 protein may render cels more sensitive to
gemcitabine-mediated apoptosis, an outcome that has important general
implications for the treatment of human cancer.


PMID: 26642705  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
