

1221. Anticancer Res. 2014 Nov;34(11):6297-304.

Effect of radiation on cell proliferation and tumor hypoxia in HPV-positive head 
and neck cancer in vivo models.

Sørensen BS(1), Busk M(2), Horsman MR(2), Alsner J(2), Overgaard J(2), Kyle
AH(3), Minchinton AI(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Clinical Oncology, Aarhus University Hospital,
Aarhus, Denmark bsin@oncology.dk.
(2)Department of Experimental Clinical Oncology, Aarhus University Hospital,
Aarhus, Denmark.
(3)BC Cancer Research Centre, Radiation Biology Unit, Vancouver, Canada.

BACKGROUND/AIM: Human papilloma virus-associated head and neck squamous cell
carcinomas (HNSCC) represent a distinct subgroup of HNSCC characterized by a
favorable prognosis and a distinct molecular biology. There is a range of
unresolved questions regarding the different biology and clinical outcome of
HPV-positive HNSCC. The purpose of the present project was to obtain insight into
the biology of treatment responsiveness of HPV-related HNSCC.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Tumor xenografts were established from HPV-negative
(FaDuDD,) and HPV-positive (UD2 and UMSCC47) HNSCC cell lines. Tumors were
treated with 10 Gy or 20 Gy and the effect on the tumor microenvironment was
studied at different time points after treatment. Cryosections were imaged for
cell proliferation, hypoxia, vessel density and vessel perfusion.
RESULTS: In the HPV-positive tumor models the levels of cell proliferation
decreased significantly following irradiation. This was not seen in the
HPV-negative model (FaDuDD). Furthermore, it was found that the tumor hypoxic
fraction decreased over time after treatment in irradiated HPV-positive tumors
and not in the HPV-negative tumors.
CONCLUSION: The radiosensitivity previously observed in vitro could be applied in
vivo in respect to a radiation-induced decrease in proliferating cells. A
decreasing hypoxic fraction following irradiation in the HPV-positive tumors
could explain the lack of benefit from hypoxic modifiers observed in patients.

Copyright© 2014 International Institute of Anticancer Research (Dr. John G.
Delinassios), All rights reserved.


PMID: 25368228  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
