

1222. Zhonghua Er Bi Yan Hou Tou Jing Wai Ke Za Zhi. 2012 Dec;47(12):974-7.

[Detection of human papillomavirus in the upper respiratory tract in children
without recurrent respiratory papillomatosis].

[Article in Chinese]

Sun YF(1), Wu YD, Wu L, Jiang JJ, Gao R, Xu B, Chen XW, Zhao ZY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology Head and Neck Surgery, The Children
Hospital, Zhejiang University School of Medicine, Key Laboratory of Reproductive 
Genetics (Zhejiang Unversity), Ministry of Education, Zhejiang Key Laboratory for
Diagnosis and Therapy of Neonatal Diseases, Hangzhou 310003, China.

OBJECTIVE: The purpose of this prospective study was to investigate the presence 
of human papillomavirus (HPV) in tonsillectomy and adenoidectomy specimens from
pediatric patients without juvenile-onset recurrent respiratory papillomatosis
(JORRP), so as to understand the effect of HPV infection in the upper respiratory
tract in children.
METHODS: Two hundred and forty-one pediatric patients without known JORRP or
other HPV-related diseases undergoing tonsillectomy and/or adenoidectomy for
hypertrophy or chronic tonsillitis were enrolled in this prospective study. One
hundred and seventy-seven fresh samples of tonsillar tissues and 195 samples of
adenoid tissues were collected and then examined for the presence of HPV DNA with
the polymerase chain reaction (PCR) technique and typing. Laryngeal papilloma
specimens from 17 patients obtained during routine debulking procedures were also
analyzed and served as positive controls.
RESULTS: All 17 papilloma specimens were positive for HPV DNA and the type was 6 
or 11. This result confirmed that the methods used were valid for detecting HPV
infection. HPV DNA was detected in 2 of the 177 tonsillar specimens and zero of
the 195 adenoid specimens. The two positive samples were confirmed with typing.
One was positive for HPV6 and the other for HPV11. Review of the medical records 
of these two cases confirmed that there were no history of HPV-related diseases. 
Histologic analysis of their specimens showed lymphoid hyperplasia, no specific
changes suggesting HPV infection and no signs of malignancy. The HPV infection
rate in upper respiratory tract was 0.8% (2/241).
CONCLUSION: There is HPV infection in upper respiratory tract in Chinese children
without JORRP, but maybe is not sufficient for the formation of JORRP.


PMID: 23328034  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
