

1234. Laryngoscope. 2009 Apr;119(4):665-74. doi: 10.1002/lary.20127.

Cytotoxicity and antiangiogenesis by fibroblast growth factor 2-targeted Ad-TK
cancer gene therapy.

Saito K(1), Khan K, Sosnowski B, Li D, O'Malley BW Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, University of
Pennsylvania School of Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA.

OBJECTIVES: Human head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) in addition to
lung, skin, ovarian, and other cancers overexpress fibroblast growth factor (FGF)
receptors on both individual tumor cells and endothelial cells within the tumor
microenvironment. The purpose of this study was to investigate whether
FGF2-targeted gene therapy could redirect adenoviral vectors encoding the herpes 
simplex virus thymidine kinase gene (Ad-TK) to FGF receptors on tumor and
endothelial cells with the intent of improving both the efficiency of transgene
expression and the antitumor response.
STUDY DESIGN AND METHODS: An Ad-TK vector consisting of a conjugate of FGF2
linked to a Fab' fragment against the adenoviral knob region was directly
delivered to human HNSCC xenograft tumors in nude mice, which were subsequently
dosed with ganciclovir. Tumor specimens were assessed for herpes simplex virus
thymidine kinase (HSV-tk) transgene mRNA expression, FGF1/2 receptor expression, 
terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase biotin-deoxy uridine triphosphate nick end 
labeling assay for apoptosis, CD31 immunohistochemistry to estimate tumor
microvessel density, and tumor volume change.
RESULTS: FGF2-retargeted Ad-TK gene therapy demonstrated significant increases in
both HSV-tk mRNA expression and cellular apoptosis levels, and a significant
decrease in tumor volume size compared with all other groups. Furthermore,
microvessel density was significantly lower in the FGF2-retargeted Ad-TK group,
indicating a strong antiangiogenesis effect.
CONCLUSIONS: These data suggest that FGF2-retargeted Ad-TK produces a combination
of expected direct antitumor cytotoxicity and a newly reported antiangiogenesis
effect that could prove promising as a novel therapeutic approach in the
treatment of FGF receptor-expressing cancers.

DOI: 10.1002/lary.20127 
PMID: 19213040  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
