

1241. Cancer Gene Ther. 2012 Mar;19(3):181-91. doi: 10.1038/cgt.2011.75. Epub 2011 Nov 
11.

Chemovirotherapy for head and neck squamous cell carcinoma with EGFR-targeted and
CD/UPRT-armed oncolytic measles virus.

Zaoui K(1), Bossow S, Grossardt C, Leber MF, Springfeld C, Plinkert PK, Kalle Cv,
Ungerechts G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Translational Oncology, National Center for Tumor Diseases,
German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany.

First-line treatment of recurrent and/or refractory head and neck squamous cell
carcinoma (HNSCC) is based on platinum, 5-fluorouracil (5-FU) and the monoclonal 
antiEGFR antibody cetuximab. However, in most cases this chemoimmunotherapy does 
not cure the disease, and more than 50% of HNSCC patients are dying because of
local recurrence of the tumors. In the majority of cases, HNSCC overexpress the
epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR), and its presence is associated with a
poor outcome. In this study, we engineered an EGFR-targeted oncolytic measles
virus (MV), armed with the bifunctional enzyme cytosine deaminase/uracil
phosphoribosyltransferase (CD/UPRT). CD/UPRT converts 5-fluorocytosine (5-FC)
into the chemotherapeutic 5-FU, a mainstay of HNSCC chemotherapy. This virus
efficiently replicates in and lyses primary HNSCC cells in vitro. Arming with
CD/UPRT mediates efficient prodrug activation with high bystander killing of
non-infected tumor cells. In mice bearing primary HNSCC xenografts, intratumoral 
administration of MV-antiEGFR resulted in statistically significant tumor growth 
delay and prolongation of survival. Importantly, combination with 5-FC is
superior to virus-only treatment leading to significant tumor growth inhibition. 
Thus, chemovirotherapy with EGFR-targeted and CD/UPRT-armed MV is highly
efficacious in preclinical settings with direct translational implications for a 
planned Phase I clinical trial of MV for locoregional treatment of HNSCC.

DOI: 10.1038/cgt.2011.75 
PMID: 22076043  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
