

1244. Epigenetics. 2014 Feb;9(2):194-203. doi: 10.4161/epi.26881. Epub 2013 Oct 29.

Differences in methylation profiles between HPV-positive and HPV-negative
oropharynx squamous cell carcinoma: a systematic review.

van Kempen PM(1), Noorlag R(2), Braunius WW(1), Stegeman I(3), Willems SM(4),
Grolman W(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery; University Medical
Center Utrecht; Utrecht; the Netherlands.
(2)Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery; University Medical Center
Utrecht; Utrecht, the Netherlands.
(3)Department of Otorhinolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery; University Medical
Center Utrecht; Utrecht; the Netherlands; Brain Center Rudolf Magnus; University 
Medical Center Utrecht; the Netherlands.
(4)Department of Pathology; University Medical Center Utrecht; Utrecht, the
Netherlands; Department of Molecular Carcinogenesis; Netherlands Cancer
Institute; Amsterdam, the Netherlands.

Oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma (OPSCC) is associated with human
papillomavirus (HPV). HPV-positive OPSCC is considered a distinct molecular
entity with a better prognosis than HPV-negative cases of OPSCC. However, the
exact pathogenic mechanisms underlying the differences in clinical and molecular 
behavior between HPV-positive and HPV-negative OPSCC remain poorly understood.
Epigenetic events play an important role in the development of cancer.
Hypermethylation of DNA in promoter regions and global hypomethylation are 2
epigenetic changes that have been frequently observed in human cancers. It is
suggested that heterogeneous epigenetic changes play a role in the clinical and
biological differences between HPV-positive and HPV-negative tumors. Unraveling
the differences in methylation profiles of HPV-associated OPSCC may provide for
promising clinical applications and may pave the road for personalized cancer
treatment. This systematic review aims to assess the current state of knowledge
regarding differences in promoter hypermethylation and global methylation between
HPV-positive and HPV-negative OPSCC.

DOI: 10.4161/epi.26881 
PMCID: PMC3962529
PMID: 24169583  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
