

1247. Mol Med. 2018 May 16;24(1):23. doi: 10.1186/s10020-018-0022-9.

Microarray analysis of human keratinocytes from different anatomic sites reveals 
site-specific immune signaling and responses to human papillomavirus type 16
transfection.

Israr M(1), Rosenthal D(1), Frejo-Navarro L(2), DeVoti J(1), Meyers C(3),
Bonagura VR(4).

Author information: 
(1)The Feinstein Institute for Medical Research, Manhasset, NY, USA; Division of 
Allergy and Immunology, Department of Pediatrics, Donald and Barbara Zucker
School of Medicine at Hofstra/Northwell, Great Neck, NY, USA.
(2)Department of Genomic Medicine, Otology and Neurotology Group CTS495, Centre
for Genomics and Oncological Research, Pfizer/Universidad de Granada/Junta de
Andalucía (GENYO), Granada, Spain.
(3)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, The Pennsylvania State University
College of Medicine, Hershey, PA, USA.
(4)The Feinstein Institute for Medical Research, Manhasset, NY, USA; Division of 
Allergy and Immunology, Department of Pediatrics, Donald and Barbara Zucker
School of Medicine at Hofstra/Northwell, Great Neck, NY, USA.
VBonagura@northwell.edu.

BACKGROUND: Stratified human keratinocytes (SHKs) are an essential part of
mucosal innate immune response that modulates adaptive immunity to microbes
encountered in the environment. The importance of these SHKs in mucosal integrity
and development has been well characterized, however their regulatory immunologic
role at different mucosal sites, has not. In this study we compared the immune
gene expression of SHKs from five different anatomical sites before and after
HPV16 transfection using microarray analyses.
METHODS: Individual pools of human keratinocytes from foreskin, cervix, vagina,
gingiva, and tonsils (HFKs, HCKs, HVKs, HGKs and HTLKs) were prepared.
Organotypic (raft) cultures were established for both normal and HPV16
immortalized HFKs, HCKs, HVKs, HGKs and HTLKs lines which stably maintained
episomal HPV16 DNA. Microarray analysis was carried out using the HumanHT-12 V4
gene chip (Illumina). Immune gene expression profiles were obtained by global
gene chip (GeneSifter) and Ingenuity pathway analysis (IPA) for each individual
site, with or without HPV16 transfection.
RESULTS: We examined site specific innate immune response gene expression in SHKs
from all five different anatomical sites before and after HPV16 transfection. We 
observed marked differences in SHK immune gene repertoires within and between
mucosal tracts before HPV 16 infection. In addition, we observed additional
changes in SHKs immune gene repertoire patterns when these SHKs were productively
transfected with HPV16. Some immune response genes were similarly expressed by
SHKs from different sites. However, there was also variable expression of
non-immune response genes, such as keratin genes, by the different SHKs.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest that keratinocytes from different anatomical
sites are likely hard wired in their innate immune responses, and that these
immune responses are unique depending on the anatomical site from which the SHKs 
were derived. These observations may help explain why select HPV types
predominate at different mucosal sites, cause persistent infection at these
sites, and on occasion, lead to HPV induced malignant and benign tumor
development.

DOI: 10.1186/s10020-018-0022-9 
PMCID: PMC6016891
PMID: 30134802  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
