

1251. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2017 Apr 1;109(4). doi: 10.1093/jnci/djx007.

Current State of PCR-Based Epstein-Barr Virus DNA Testing for Nasopharyngeal
Cancer.

Kim KY(1), Le QT(2), Yom SS(3), Pinsky BA(4), Bratman SV(5), Ng RH(6), El Mubarak
HS(7), Chan KC(8), Sander M(9), Conley BA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Diagnosis Program, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of
Health, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.
(2)Department of Radiation Oncology, Stanford University School of Medicine,
Stanford, CA, USA.
(3)Department of Radiation Oncology, University of California, San Francisco, CA,
USA.
(4)Departments of Pathology and Medicine, Stanford University School of Medicine,
Stanford, CA, USA.
(5)Department of Radiation Oncology, Princess Margaret Cancer Centre/University
of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(6)Department of Otolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, University of Toronto,
Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(7)Division of Microbiology Devices, Center for Devices and Radiological Health, 
Food and Drug Administration, Silver Spring, MD, USA.
(8)Department of Chemical Pathology, State Key Laboratory in Oncology of South
China, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR, China.
(9)Page One Editorial Services, Boulder, CO, USA.

Clinical studies have shown plasma Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) DNA level to be an
independent prognostic biomarker for nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC). However, the
proportion of NPC patients whose tumors are associated with EBV vary with
geographic location, and there are a variety of assays for plasma EBV. To develop
the level of evidence needed to demonstrate the clinical utility of plasma EBV
DNA detection for NPC patients and encourage widespread adoption of this
biomarker test in clinical laboratories, validated harmonized assays are needed. 
In 2015, the National Cancer Institute (NCI) convened a Workshop on Harmonization
of EBV Testing for Nasopharyngeal Cancer, where experts in head and neck oncology
and laboratory medicine addressed the limitations of currently available
polymerase chain reaction-based EBV DNA quantitation assays and discussed
strategies for advancing the development of harmonized EBV DNA assays and their
appropriate clinical use. This article presents the key recommendations to direct
future efforts in assay harmonization and validation.

Published by Oxford University Press 2017. This work is written by US Government 
employees and is in the public domain in the US.

DOI: 10.1093/jnci/djx007 
PMCID: PMC6279258
PMID: 28376165  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
