

1253. PLoS One. 2016 Sep 19;11(9):e0162244. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0162244.
eCollection 2016.

Airway Secretory microRNAome Changes during Rhinovirus Infection in Early
Childhood.

Gutierrez MJ(1), Gomez JL(2), Perez GF(3)(4)(5)(6), Pancham K(2), Val S(7),
Pillai DK(3)(4)(5)(6), Giri M(6), Ferrante S(6), Freishtat R(4)(5)(6)(8), Rose
MC(3)(4)(5)(6), Preciado D(7), Nino G(9)(3)(4)(5)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Allergy Immunology, Johns Hopkins University School of
Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland, United States of America.
(2)Division of Pediatric Pulmonology, University of Kentucky, Lexington,
Kentucky, United States of America.
(3)Division of Pulmonary and Sleep Medicine, Children's National Medical Center, 
Washington, DC, United States of America.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, George Washington University School of Medicine and 
Health Sciences, Washington, DC, United States of America.
(5)Department of Integrative Systems Biology and Center for Genetic Medicine
Research, George Washington University, Washington, DC, United States of America.
(6)Center for Genetic Medicine Research, Children's National Medical Center,
Washington, DC, United States of America.
(7)Division of Pediatric Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Children's
National Medical Center, Washington, DC, United States of America.
(8)Division of Emergency Medicine, Children's National Medical Center,
Washington, DC, United States of America.
(9)Division of Pulmonary, Critical Care and Sleep Medicine, Yale University
School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut, United States of America.

BACKGROUND: Innate immune responses are fine-tuned by small noncoding RNA
molecules termed microRNAs (miRs) that modify gene expression in response to the 
environment. During acute infections, miRs can be secreted in extracellular
vesicles (EV) to facilitate cell-to-cell genetic communication. The purpose of
this study was to characterize the baseline population of miRs secreted in EVs in
the airways of young children (airway secretory microRNAome) and examine the
changes during rhinovirus (RV) infection, the most common cause of asthma
exacerbations and the most important early risk factor for the development of
asthma beyond childhood.
METHODS: Nasal airway secretions were obtained from children (≤3 yrs. old) during
PCR-confirmed RV infections (n = 10) and age-matched controls (n = 10). Nasal EVs
were isolated with polymer-based precipitation and global miR profiles generated 
using NanoString microarrays. We validated our in vivo airway secretory miR data 
in an in vitro airway epithelium model using apical secretions from primary human
bronchial epithelial cells (HBEC) differentiated at air-liquid interface (ALI).
Bioinformatics tools were used to determine the unified (nasal and bronchial)
signature airway secretory miRNAome and changes during RV infection in children.
RESULTS: Multiscale analysis identified four signature miRs comprising the
baseline airway secretory miRNAome: hsa-miR-630, hsa-miR-302d-3p, hsa- miR-320e, 
hsa-miR-612. We identified hsa-miR-155 as the main change in the baseline
miRNAome during RV infection in young children. We investigated the potential
biological relevance of the airway secretion of hsa-mir-155 using in silico
models derived from gene datasets of experimental in vivo human RV infection.
These analyses confirmed that hsa-miR-155 targetome is an overrepresented pathway
in the upper airways of individuals infected with RV.
CONCLUSIONS: Comparative analysis of the airway secretory microRNAome in children
indicates that RV infection is associated with airway secretion of EVs containing
miR-155, which is predicted in silico to regulate antiviral immunity. Further
characterization of the airway secretory microRNAome during health and disease
may lead to completely new strategies to treat and monitor respiratory conditions
in all ages.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0162244 
PMCID: PMC5028059
PMID: 27643599  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
