

127. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol. 2017 Jul;38(7):1405-1410. doi: 10.3174/ajnr.A5177. Epub
2017 Apr 27.

Solid Lymph Nodes as an Imaging Biomarker for Risk Stratification in Human
Papillomavirus-Related Oropharyngeal Squamous Cell Carcinoma.

Rath TJ(1)(2), Narayanan S(3), Hughes MA(4)(2), Ferris RL(2), Chiosea SI(5),
Branstetter BF 4th(4)(2).

Author information: 
(1)From the Departments of Radiology (T.J.R., M.A.H., B.F.B.) rathtj@upmc.edu.
(2)Otolaryngology (T.J.R., M.A.H., R.L.F., B.F.B.).
(3)Department of Radiology (S.N.), Children's Hospital of Pittsburgh of the
University of Pittsburgh Medical Center, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.
(4)From the Departments of Radiology (T.J.R., M.A.H., B.F.B.).
(5)Pathology (S.I.C.), University of Pittsburgh Medical Center, Pittsburgh,
Pennsylvania.

BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: Human papillomavirus-related oropharyngeal squamous cell 
carcinoma is associated with cystic lymph nodes on CT and has a favorable
prognosis. A subset of patients with aggressive disease experience treatment
failure. Our aim was to determine whether the extent of cystic lymph node burden 
on staging CT can serve as an imaging biomarker to predict treatment failure in
human papillomavirus-related oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We identified patients with human papilloma virus-related 
oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma and staging neck CTs. Demographic and
clinical variables were recorded. We retrospectively classified the metastatic
lymph node burden on CT as cystic or solid and assessed radiologic extracapsular 
spread. Biopsy, subsequent imaging, or clinical follow-up was the reference
standard for treatment failure. The primary end point was disease-free survival. 
Cox proportional hazard regression analyses of clinical, demographic, and
anatomic variables for treatment failure were performed.
RESULTS: One hundred eighty-three patients were included with a mean follow-up of
38 months. In univariate analysis, the following variables had a statistically
significant association with treatment failure: solid-versus-cystic lymph nodes, 
clinical T-stage, clinical N-stage, and radiologic evidence of extracapsular
spread. The multivariate Cox proportional hazard model resulted in a model that
included solid-versus-cystic lymph nodes, T-stage, and radiologic evidence of
extracapsular spread as independent predictors of treatment failure. Patients
with cystic nodal metastasis at staging had significantly better disease-free
survival than patients with solid lymph nodes.
CONCLUSIONS: In human papilloma virus-related oropharyngeal squamous cell
carcinoma, patients with solid lymph node metastases are at higher risk for
treatment failure with worse disease-free survival. Solid lymph nodes may serve
as an imaging biomarker to tailor individual treatment regimens.

© 2017 by American Journal of Neuroradiology.

DOI: 10.3174/ajnr.A5177 
PMID: 28450437  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
