

1271. Anticancer Res. 2017 Jun;37(6):2845-2852.

Impact of Small Molecules on β-Catenin and E-Cadherin Expression in
HPV16-positive and -negative Squamous Cell Carcinomas.

Kramer B(1), Hock C(2), Schultz JD(3), Lammert A(2), Kuhlin B(2), Birk R(2),
Hörmann K(2), Aderhold C(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology Head and Neck Surgery, University Hospital
Mannheim, Medical Faculty Mannheim, University Heidelberg, Mannheim, Germany
benedikt.kramer@umm.de.
(2)Department of Otorhinolaryngology Head and Neck Surgery, University Hospital
Mannheim, Medical Faculty Mannheim, University Heidelberg, Mannheim, Germany.
(3)Department of Otorhinolaryngology Head and Neck Surgery, Facial Plastic
Surgery, Hospital of Karlsruhe, Karlsruhe, Germany.

BACKGROUND: The validation of potential molecular targets in head and neck
squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) is mandatory. β-Catenin and E-cadherin are crucial 
for cancer progression through epithelial-mesenchymal transition. We analyzed the
effect of the tyrosine kinase inhibitors nilotinib, dasatinib, erlotinib and
gefitinib on β-catenin and E-cadherin expression in SCC with respect to human
papillomavirus (HPV) status.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Expression of β-catenin and E-cadherin in cell lines UMSCC
11A, UMSCC 14C and CERV196 under the influence of tyrosine kinase inhibitors were
analyzed by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay.
RESULTS: All agents reduced β-catenin and E-cadherin expression of HPV16-negative
cells. Increased E-cadherin expression was observed after treatment with
gefitinib and dasatinib in HPV16-positive cells.
CONCLUSION: All substances, nilotinib, dasatinib, erlotinib and gefitinib have a 
significant impact on β-catenin and E-cadherin expression in both HPV16-positive 
and HPV16-negative cells in vitro. Alterations of β-catenin and E-cadherin could 
provide novel insights for future targeted therapies of head and neck SCC.

Copyright© 2017, International Institute of Anticancer Research (Dr. George J.
Delinasios), All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.21873/anticanres.11636 
PMID: 28551620  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
