

1293. J Clin Microbiol. 2014 Aug;52(8):3030-7. doi: 10.1128/JCM.00870-14. Epub 2014 Jun
11.

Hypertrophic adenoid is a major infection site of human bocavirus 1.

Proenca-Modena JL(1), Paula FE(2), Buzatto GP(3), Carenzi LR(3), Saturno TH(4),
Prates MC(4), Silva ML(2), Delcaro LS(5), Valera FC(3), Tamashiro E(3),
Anselmo-Lima WT(3), Arruda E(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, University of São Paulo School of Medicine,
Ribeirão Preto, Brazil Virology Research Center, University of São Paulo School
of Medicine, Ribeirão Preto, Brazil Department of Genetics, Evolution, and
Bioagents, Institute of Biology, University of Campinas (UNICAMP), Campinas, São 
Paulo, Brazil.
(2)Department of Cell Biology, University of São Paulo School of Medicine,
Ribeirão Preto, Brazil Virology Research Center, University of São Paulo School
of Medicine, Ribeirão Preto, Brazil.
(3)Department of Ophthalmology, Otorhinolaryngology, and Head and Neck Surgery,
University of São Paulo School of Medicine, Ribeirão Preto, Brazil.
(4)Virology Research Center, University of São Paulo School of Medicine, Ribeirão
Preto, Brazil Department of Ophthalmology, Otorhinolaryngology, and Head and Neck
Surgery, University of São Paulo School of Medicine, Ribeirão Preto, Brazil.
(5)Department of Internal Medicine, University of São Paulo School of Medicine,
Ribeirão Preto, Brazil.
(6)Department of Cell Biology, University of São Paulo School of Medicine,
Ribeirão Preto, Brazil Virology Research Center, University of São Paulo School
of Medicine, Ribeirão Preto, Brazil eaneto@fmrp.usp.br.

Human bocavirus 1 (HBoV1) is associated with respiratory infections worldwide,
mainly in children. Similar to other parvoviruses, it is believed that HBoV1 can 
persist for long periods of time in humans, probably through maintaining
concatemers of the virus single-stranded DNA genome in the nuclei of infected
cells. Recently, HBoV-1 was detected in high rates in adenoid and palatine
tonsils samples from patients with chronic adenotonsillar diseases, but nothing
is known about the virus replication levels in those tissues. A 3-year
prospective hospital-based study was conducted to detect and quantify HBoV1 DNA
and mRNAs in samples of the adenoids (AD), palatine tonsils (PT), nasopharyngeal 
secretions (NPS), and peripheral blood (PB) from patients undergoing
tonsillectomy for tonsillar hypertrophy or recurrent tonsillitis. HBoV1 was
detected in 25.3% of the AD samples, while the rates of detection in the PT, NPS,
and PB samples were 7.2%, 10.5%, and 1.7%, respectively. The viral loads were
higher in AD samples, and 27.3% of the patients with HBoV had mRNA detectable in 
this tissue. High viral loads and detectable mRNA in the AD were associated with 
HBoV1 detection in the other sample sites. The adenoids are an important site of 
HBoV1 replication and persistence in children with tonsillar hypertrophy. The
adenoids contain high HBoV1 loads and are frequently positive for HBoV mRNA, and 
this is associated with the detection of HBoV1 in secretions.

Copyright © 2014, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/JCM.00870-14 
PMCID: PMC4136160
PMID: 24920770  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
