

1294. Immunol Lett. 2016 Apr;172:11-20. doi: 10.1016/j.imlet.2016.02.006. Epub 2016 Feb
10.

Conserved stem fragment from H3 influenza hemagglutinin elicits cross-clade
neutralizing antibodies through stalk-targeted blocking of conformational change 
during membrane fusion.

Gong X(1), Yin H(1), Shi Y(1), Guan S(1), He X(1), Yang L(1), Yu Y(1), Kuai Z(1),
Jiang C(2), Kong W(2), Wang S(3), Shan Y(4).

Author information: 
(1)National Engineering Laboratory for AIDS Vaccine, School of Life Sciences,
Jilin University, Changchun, Jilin, China.
(2)National Engineering Laboratory for AIDS Vaccine, School of Life Sciences,
Jilin University, Changchun, Jilin, China; Key Laboratory for Molecular
Enzymology and Engineering, The Ministry of Education, School of Life Sciences,
Jilin University, Changchun, Jilin, China.
(3)State Key Laboratory of Theoretical and Computational Chemistry, Institute of 
Theoretical Chemistry, Jilin University, Changchun, Jilin, China.
(4)National Engineering Laboratory for AIDS Vaccine, School of Life Sciences,
Jilin University, Changchun, Jilin, China; Key Laboratory for Molecular
Enzymology and Engineering, The Ministry of Education, School of Life Sciences,
Jilin University, Changchun, Jilin, China. Electronic address: shanym@jlu.edu.cn.

Currently available influenza vaccines typically fail to elicit/boost broadly
neutralizing antibodies due to the mutability of virus sequences and
conformational changes during protective immunity, thereby limiting their
efficacy. This problem needs to be addressed by further understanding the
mechanisms of neutralization and finding the desired neutralizing site during
membrane fusion. This study specifically focused on viruses of the H3N2 subtype, 
which have persisted as a principal source of influenza-related morbidity and
mortality in humans since the 1968 influenza pandemic. Through sequence alignment
and epitope prediction, a series of highly conserved stem fragments (spanning 47 
years) were found and coupled to the Keyhole Limpet Hemocyanin (KLH) protein. By 
application of a combinatorial display library and crystal structure modeling, a 
stem fragment immunogen, located at the turning point of the HA neck undergoing
conformational change during membrane fusion with both B- and T-cell epitopes,
was identified. After synthesis of the optimal stem fragment using a multiple
antigen peptide (MAP) system, strong humoral immune responses and cross-clade
neutralizing activities against strains from the H3 subtype of group 2 influenza 
viruses after animal immunizations were observed. By detection of nuclear protein
immunofluorescence with acid bypass treatment, antisera raised against MAP4
immunogens of the stem fragment showed the potential to inhibit the
conformational change of HA in stem-targeted virus neutralization. The
identification of this conserved stem fragment provides great potential for
exploitation of this site of vulnerability in therapeutic and vaccine design.

Copyright © 2016 European Federation of Immunological Societies. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.imlet.2016.02.006 
PMID: 26875772  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
