

1325. Zhonghua Er Bi Yan Hou Tou Jing Wai Ke Za Zhi. 2013 Sep;48(9):761-4.

[Influence on cell proliferation by small interfering RNA of Cyclin Y expression 
in laryngeal cancer cells].

[Article in Chinese]

Tai J(1), Li AD, Rao YS, Huang YB, Huang ZG, Yu ZK, Chen XH, Zhou WG, Xiao X,
Wang S, Han Y, Liu QY, Fang JG(2), Ni X(3).

Author information: 
(1)Beijing Key Laboratory for Pediatric Otolaryngology, Head and Neck Science,
Beijing Pediatric Research Institute,Beijing Children's Hospital, Capital Medical
University, Beijing 100045, China.
(2)Department of Otorhinolaryngology Head and Neck Surgery, Beijing Tongren
Hospital, Capital Medical University, Beijing 100029, China.
Email:fangjugao@vip.sohu.com.
(3)Beijing Key Laboratory for Pediatric Otolaryngology, Head and Neck Science,
Beijing Pediatric Research Institute,Beijing Children's Hospital, Capital Medical
University, Beijing 100045, China. Email:nixin@bch.com.cn.

OBJECTIVE: The effects of lentivirus-mediated suppression of Cyclin Y (CCNY)
expression on the proliferation of laryngeal cancer cells were investigated in
vitro.
METHODS: The lentivirus vectors containing a small hairpin RNA (shRNA) to target 
CCNY were constructed.Hep-2 cells were divided into the following two
experimental groups:the negative control group (control lentivirus infected
cells) and CCNY knockdown group (CCNY shRNA-expressing lentivirus infected
cells). After Hep-2 cells were infected, Real-time PCR was used to measure CCNY
expression. The influence of CCNY on the proliferation of laryngeal cancer cells 
were assessed using MTT and colony formation experiments.Each experiment was
performed in triplicate and repeated three times.
RESULTS: Lentiviruses expressing shRNA against CCNY were constructed and Hep-2
cells were infected with above mentioned lentivirus at MOI (Multiplicity of
infection) of 120.Real-time PCR analysis showed that the mRNA expression of CCNY 
in Hep-2 cells in the knockdown group was significantly decreased (P < 0.05); the
mRNA level of CCNY was 75.3% lower in the si-CCNY group than in the si-CTRL
group. After 5 days of lentiviral infection, the cell viability was significantly
lower in cells infected with the CCNY-shRNA lentivirus compared to cells infected
with the control lentivirus following a 6-day incubation. The colony number was
decreased by 60% in Hep-2 cells infected with the CCNY-shRNA-lentivirus infected 
cells following a 10-day incubation.
CONCLUSIONS: The results suggested that lentivirus-mediated downregulation of
CCNY expression decreased the proliferation and growth potency of laryngeal
cancer cells.Lentiviruses delivering shRNA against CCNY may be a promising tool
for laryngeal cancer therapy.


PMID: 24330880  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
