

1329. Hum Gene Ther. 2013 Oct;24(10):861-70. doi: 10.1089/hum.2013.102.

Enhanced therapeutic effects conferred by an experimental DNA vaccine targeting
human papillomavirus-induced tumors.

Diniz MO(1), Cariri FA, Aps LR, Ferreira LC.

Author information: 
(1)Vaccine Development Laboratory, Department of Microbiology, Institute of
Biomedical Sciences, University of São Paulo , São Paulo, SP, 05508-900 Brazil .

Human papillomavirus (HPV) infection is responsible for all cervical cancer
cases, other anogenital cancers, and head and neck tumors. The epidemiological
relevance of HPV-induced tumors reinforces the need for the development of
therapeutic antitumor vaccines. Clinical trials with different vaccine
formulations, particularly DNA vaccines, have provided promising results but have
still been unable to achieve the immunogenicity required for use in infected
patients. In experimental conditions, anticancer HPV-specific vaccines induced
E7-specific CD8(+) T-cell responses but did not confer full therapeutic antitumor
protection in mice with transplanted HPV-expressing TC-1 cells, which are the
most frequently used nonclinical protection correlate for antitumor effects. Our 
group has developed a DNA vaccine strategy based on the fusion of HPV
oncoproteins to the herpes virus gD protein. This vaccine promoted the induction 
of antigen-specific cytotoxic CD8(+) T-cell responses and partial antitumor
therapeutic effects based on the blockade of coinhibitory signals and the
enhancement of coactivation mechanisms. In the present study, we report
conditions leading to full therapeutic antitumor effects using the TC-1 cell
murine model after a single vaccine dose. The combination of a coadministered
plasmid encoding IL-2, optimization of the coding sequence for mammalian cells,
and the use of different delivery routes resulted in enhancements of the
E7-specific cytotoxic CD8(+) T-cell responses and full therapeutic protection
under experimental conditions. The combination of these strategies augmented the 
potency of the DNA vaccine formulation to levels not previously achieved by other
therapeutic antitumor vaccines under similar experimental conditions, including
some that have been taken to clinical trials.

DOI: 10.1089/hum.2013.102 
PMID: 24007495  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
