

1344. PLoS One. 2013 Nov 4;8(11):e78127. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0078127. eCollection
2013.

Preferential activation of the hedgehog pathway by epigenetic modulations in HPV 
negative HNSCC identified with meta-pathway analysis.

Fertig EJ(1), Markovic A, Danilova LV, Gaykalova DA, Cope L, Chung CH, Ochs MF,
Califano JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center, Johns
Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland, United States of America.

Head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) is largely divided into two groups 
based on their etiology, human papillomavirus (HPV)-positive and -negative.
Global DNA methylation changes are known to drive oncogene and tumor suppressor
expression in primary HNSCC of both types. However, significant heterogeneity in 
DNA methylation within the groups results in different transcriptional profiles
and clinical outcomes. We applied a meta-pathway analysis to link gene expression
changes to DNA methylation in distinguishing HNSCC subtypes. This approach
isolated specific epigenetic changes controlling expression in HPV- HNSCC that
distinguish it from HPV+ HNSCC. Analysis of genes identified Hedgehog pathway
activation specific to HPV- HNSCC. We confirmed that GLI1, the primary Hedgehog
target, showed higher expression in tumors compared to normal samples with HPV-
tumors having the highest GLI1 expression, suggesting that increased expression
of GLI1 is a potential driver in HPV- HNSCC. Our algorithm for integration of DNA
methylation and gene expression can infer biologically significant molecular
pathways that may be exploited as therapeutics targets. Our results suggest that 
therapeutics targeting the Hedgehog pathway may be of benefit in HPV- HNSCC.
Similar integrative analysis of high-throughput coupled DNA methylation and
expression datasets may yield novel insights into deregulated pathways in other
cancers.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0078127 
PMCID: PMC3817178
PMID: 24223768  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
