

1350. JCI Insight. 2016 Oct 20;1(17):e89829.

The head and neck cancer immune landscape and its immunotherapeutic implications.

Mandal R(1), Şenbabaoğlu Y(2), Desrichard A(3), Havel JJ(3), Dalin MG(3), Riaz
N(4), Lee KW(3), Ganly I(5), Hakimi AA(6), Chan TA(7), Morris LG(1).

Author information: 
(1)Human Oncology and Pathogenesis Program,; Head and Neck Service, Department of
Surgery,; Immunogenomics and Precision Oncology Platform.
(2)Ludwig Collaborative/Swim Across America Laboratory, Immunology Program and
Department of Medicine.
(3)Human Oncology and Pathogenesis Program,; Immunogenomics and Precision
Oncology Platform.
(4)Immunogenomics and Precision Oncology Platform,; Department of Radiation
Oncology.
(5)Head and Neck Service, Department of Surgery.
(6)Urology Service, Department of Surgery, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer
Center, New York, New York, USA.
(7)Human Oncology and Pathogenesis Program,; Immunogenomics and Precision
Oncology Platform,; Department of Radiation Oncology.

Recent clinical trials have demonstrated a clear survival advantage in advanced
head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) patients treated with immune
checkpoint blockade. These emerging results reveal that HNSCC is one of the most 
promising frontiers for immunotherapy research. However, further progress in head
and neck immuno-oncology will require a detailed understanding of the immune
infiltrative landscape found in these tumors. We leveraged transcriptome data
from 280 tumors profiled by The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) to comprehensively
characterize the immune landscape of HNSCC in order to develop a rationale for
immunotherapeutic strategies in HNSCC and guide clinical investigation. We find
that both HPV+ and HPV- HNSCC tumors are among the most highly immune-infiltrated
cancer types. Strikingly, HNSCC had the highest median Treg/CD8+ T cell ratio and
the highest levels of CD56dim NK cell infiltration, in our pan-cancer analysis of
the most immune-infiltrated tumors. CD8+ T cell infiltration and CD56dim NK cell 
infiltration each correlated with superior survival in HNSCC. Tumors harboring
genetic smoking signatures had lower immune infiltration and were associated with
poorer survival, suggesting these patients may benefit from immune agonist
therapy. These findings illuminate the immune landscape of HPV+ and HPV- HNSCC.
Additionally, this landscape provides a potentially novel rationale for
investigation of agents targeting modulators of Tregs (e.g., CTLA-4, GITR, ICOS, 
IDO, and VEGFA) and NK cells (e.g., KIR, TIGIT, and 4-1BB) as adjuncts to
anti-PD-1 in the treatment of advanced HNSCC.

DOI: 10.1172/jci.insight.89829 
PMCID: PMC5070962
PMID: 27777979  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
