

1351. Oral Oncol. 2015 Sep;51(9):832-8. doi: 10.1016/j.oraloncology.2015.06.005. Epub
2015 Jun 26.

Socioeconomic characteristics of patients with oropharyngeal carcinoma according 
to tumor HPV status, patient smoking status, and sexual behavior.

Dahlstrom KR(1), Bell D(2), Hanby D(3), Li G(4), Wang LE(5), Wei Q(6), Williams
MD(2), Sturgis EM(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Head and Neck Surgery, The University of Texas MD Anderson
Cancer Center, Houston, TX, United States. Electronic address:
kdahlstrom@mdanderson.org.
(2)Department of Pathology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston, TX, United States.
(3)Department of Head and Neck Surgery, The University of Texas MD Anderson
Cancer Center, Houston, TX, United States; Department of Otolaryngology,
Louisiana State University Health Sciences Center, New Orleans, LA, United
States.
(4)Department of Head and Neck Surgery, The University of Texas MD Anderson
Cancer Center, Houston, TX, United States; Department of Epidemiology, The
University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, United States.
(5)Department of Epidemiology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston, TX, United States.
(6)Department of Epidemiology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston, TX, United States; Department of Medicine, Duke University School of
Medicine and Duke Cancer Institute, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC,
United States.

OBJECTIVES: Patients with oropharyngeal cancer (OPC) have distinct risk factor
profiles reflected in the human papillomavirus (HPV) status of their tumor, and
these profiles may also be influenced by factors related to socioeconomic status 
(SES). The goal of this study was to describe the socioeconomic characteristics
of a large cohort of patients with OPC according to HPV status, smoking status,
and sexual behavior.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Patients with OPC prospectively provided information about
their smoking and alcohol use, socioeconomic characteristics, and sexual
behaviors. HPV status was determined by a composite of immunohistochemistry for
p16 expression, HPV in situ hybridization, and PCR assay in 356 patients.
Standard descriptive statistics and logistic regression were used to compare
socioeconomic characteristics between patient subgroups.
RESULTS: Patients with HPV-positive OPC had higher levels of education, income,
and overall SES. Among patients with HPV-positive OPC, never/light smokers had
more than 5 times the odds of having at least a bachelor's degree and being in
the highest level of SES compared with smokers. Patients with HPV-positive OPC
and those with higher levels of education and SES had higher numbers of lifetime 
any and oral sex partners, although not all of these differences were
significant.
CONCLUSION: Socioeconomic differences among subgroups of OPC patients have
implications for OPC prevention efforts, including tobacco cessation, behavior
modification, and vaccination programs.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.oraloncology.2015.06.005 
PMCID: PMC4532617
PMID: 26120093  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
