

1367. Ann Oncol. 2016 Dec;27(12):2262-2268. doi: 10.1093/annonc/mdw426. Epub 2016 Sep
28.

Targeted next-generation sequencing identifies molecular subgroups in squamous
cell carcinoma of the head and neck with distinct outcome after concurrent
chemoradiation.

Tinhofer I(1)(2), Stenzinger A(3)(4), Eder T(5)(2), Konschak R(5)(2), Niehr
F(5)(2), Endris V(3), Distel L(6), Hautmann MG(7), Mandic R(8), Stromberger C(5),
Weichert W(3)(9)(10), Budach V(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiooncology and Radiotherapy, Charite University Hospital,
Berlin ingeborg.tinhofer@charite.de.
(2)German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, and German Cancer Consortium
(DKTK) Partner Site Berlin.
(3)Institute of Pathology, University Hospital and National Center for Tumor
Diseases, Heidelberg, Germany.
(4)Department of Pathology, Center for Integrated Diagnostics, Massachusetts
General Hospital/Harvard Medical School, Boston, USA.
(5)Department of Radiooncology and Radiotherapy, Charite University Hospital,
Berlin.
(6)Department of Radiation Oncology, University Hospitals Erlangen-Nürnberg,
Erlangen.
(7)Department of Radiotherapy, University Hospital Regensburg.
(8)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Head & Neck Surgery, University Hospital
Giessen-Marburg, Marburg.
(9)Institute of Pathology, Technical University Munich (TUM), Munich.
(10)German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, and German Cancer
Consortium (DKTK) partner site Munich, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Based on epidemiological (HPV status, smoking habits) and clinical
risk factors (T/N stage), three subgroups of patients suffering from locally
advanced oropharyngeal carcinoma with significantly different outcome after
concurrent chemoradiation (cCRTX) can be distinguished. Mutational profiling by
targeted next-generation sequencing (NGS) might further improve risk
stratification.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Patients with stage IV squamous cell carcinoma of the
oropharynx and hypopharynx who had been enrolled in a randomized phase III trial 
(ARO-0401) comparing two regimens of cCRTX and from whom archival tumor specimens
were available were included. The HPV status was determined by p16 immunostaining
and detection of HPV DNA. Targeted NGS covering 45 genes frequently altered in
squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck (SCCHN) was applied for detection of
non-synonymous somatic and germline mutations. Interference of mutational
profiles with cCRTX efficacy was determined.
RESULTS: The prognostic value of the 'Ang' risk model could be confirmed in the
total biomarker study cohort (N = 175) as well as the patient subgroup for which 
mutational profiles could be established (N = 97). Mutations in genes involved in
phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K), receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK), and p53
signaling pathways were significantly enriched in the low- (N = 7), intermediate-
(N = 20), and high-risk group (N = 70), respectively. Mutations in TP53
identified a subgroup of high-risk patients with dismal outcome after cCRTX. No
prognostic relevance was observed for mutations in PI3K and RTK signaling
pathways in the low- and intermediate-risk groups, respectively. Mutated NOTCH1
and two functional KDR germline variants (rs2305948, rs1870377) were associated
with improved outcome in all risk groups. All genetic markers (TP53, NOTCH1, KDR)
remained independent prognosticators of OS in the multivariate model.
CONCLUSION: A potential of targeted NGS for risk classification of SCCHN cases
beyond HPV status and clinical factors was demonstrated.

© The Author 2016. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the European
Society for Medical Oncology. All rights reserved. For permissions, please email:
journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/annonc/mdw426 
PMID: 27681865  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
