

1385. Anticancer Res. 2015 Mar;35(3):1389-99.

Small molecules alter VEGFR and PTEN expression in HPV-positive and -negative
SCC: new hope for targeted-therapy.

Aderhold C(1), Faber A(2), Umbreit C(2), Chakraborty A(2), Bockmayer A(2), Birk
R(2), Sommer JU(2), Hörmann K(2), Schultz JD(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology Head and Neck Surgery, University Hospital
Mannheim, Mannheim, Germany christoph.aderhold@umm.de.
(2)Department of Otorhinolaryngology Head and Neck Surgery, University Hospital
Mannheim, Mannheim, Germany.

BACKGROUND/AIM: Prognosis for patients with head and neck squamous cell carcinoma
(HNSCC) is poor in most cases and has not improved despite advances in therapy.
Novel therapeutic approaches are mandatory in order to improve the situation.
Everolimus, an inhibitor of mammalian target of rapamycin, as well as the
multi-tyrosine kinase inhibitors sorafenib and sunitinib, has demonstrated a
substantial therapeutic effect in various types of human cancer with moderate
side-effects. Expression of vascular endothelial growth factor receptor (VEGFR) 1
and 2, and of the tumor-suppressor protein phosphatase and tensin homolog deleted
on chromosome 10 (PTEN) were evaluated in chemonaïve human papillomavirus
(HPV)-positive and -negative squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) and after exposure to 
everolimus, sorafenib or sunitinib.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: p16-positive CERV196 and p16-negative HNSCC 11A and 14C
cells were incubated with different drug concentrations for 48-192 h. Expression 
of VEGFR1 and -2 as well as PTEN were determined by enzyme-linked immunosorbent
assay and was compared to a chemonaïve control.
RESULTS: VEGFR1 and -2, as well as PTEN, were expressed in all three cell lines. 
Sunitinib, sorafenib and everolimus significantly reduced the expression of
VEGFR1 and -2, especially in p16-positive CERV196 cells. Sunitinib appeared to be
more effective in reducing VEGFR1 and -2 expression than sorafenib and
everolimus. PTEN levels were remarkably lower in HPV-positive CERV196 cells. PTEN
expression increased significantly under sunitinib and sorafenib in HNSCC 11A and
CERV196 cells. Everolimus, on the other hand, led to a significant decrease of
PTEN expression in these cell lines.
CONCLUSION: The tested drugs displayed a remarkable anti-angiogenic effect by
inhibition of VEGFR1 and -2 expression. Sunitinib and sorafenib were able to
increase PTEN expression, which might induce apoptosis of cancer cells.
HPV-positive CERV196 cells were characterized by an increased susceptibility to
these small-molecule drugs. Further studies are imperative to scrutinize HPV
status-dependent differences in drug response and possible implications for
future treatment options.

Copyright© 2015 International Institute of Anticancer Research (Dr. John G.
Delinassios), All rights reserved.


PMID: 25750290  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
