

1386. Acta Dermatovenerol Alp Pannonica Adriat. 2011 Sep;20(3):161-73.

Carcinoma of the head and neck in the HPV era.

Cardesa A(1), Nadal A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomic Pathology, Faculty of Medicine, Hospital Clinic,
University of Barcelona, August Pi i Sunyer Institute of Biomedical Research,
Barcelona, Spain. acardesa@clinic.ub.es

This review encompasses the most salient advances in the understanding of the
biopathology of head and neck squamous-cell carcinoma (HNSCC) accomplished over
the last decade, emphasizing the significant role played by high-risk HPV
genotypes. This has led to a new and meaningful subdivision of conventional HNSCC
in two main prognostic and therapeutic groups: 1) keratinizing HNSCC, mainly
occurring in elderly men that are heavy smokers and drinkers, TP53 mutated and/or
p53-positive, HPV16-negative, being associated with an aggressive course; and 2) 
non-keratinizing HNSCC, occurring in younger men between 40 and 60 years that are
non-smokers and non-drinkers, HPV16- positive, p16-positive, and p53- negative,
being associated with improved prognosis. The main risk factors are number of
sexual partners, oral-genital sex, oral-anal sex, and marijuana use. Among the
unusual variants of HNSCC, papillary and lymphoepithelial-like are mostly related
to HPV-16 infection, whereas the spindle and acantholytic types are mainly
associated with tobacco and alcohol. The basaloid, adenosquamous, and verrucous
variants may be related to both types of risk factors. Spindle cell carcinoma has
been shown to be a prototype of epithelial mesenchymal transition. The hallmark
of the novel and aggressive entity "undifferentiated midline carcinoma" is the
rearrangement of the Nuclear Protein in Testis (NUT) gene at t[15; 19]. In the
HPV era we are proposing the Ljubljana Classification (LC) as the recommended
system for grading precursor lesions in heavy cigarette smokers and alcohol
drinkers and the dysplasia and SIN systems for grading intraepithelial precursor 
lesions related to the increasingly detected epidemic of HNSCC associated with
high-risk HPV infections.


PMID: 22131117  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
