

1387. Semin Radiat Oncol. 2012 Apr;22(2):128-42. doi: 10.1016/j.semradonc.2011.12.004.

Human papillomavirus as a marker of the natural history and response to therapy
of head and neck squamous cell carcinoma.

Ang KK(1), Sturgis EM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston, TX, USA. kianang@mdanderson.org

There has been a gradual change in the demographics of head and neck carcinoma.
Although relatively uncommon, the incidence of oropharyngeal carcinoma has been
increasing despite declining tobacco consumption and contrary to a diminishing
incidence of cancers at other head and neck sites. It is now clear that the
incidence of human papillomavirus (HPV)-associated oropharyngeal cancers is
rising, likely as a consequence of changing life styles and sexual behaviors.
Many studies have contributed to understanding the characteristics of HPV-related
oropharyngeal carcinoma, which usually presents as nonkeratinizing squamous cell 
carcinoma of low to intermediate T-category and affects middle-aged white men,
having higher socioeconomic status and no or brief history of tobacco
consumption. The diagnosis of this distinct neoplastic entity can be firmly
established by a combination of p16 immunohistochemical and in situ hybridization
assays. Compared with the traditional smoking-associated head and neck squamous
cell carcinoma, HPV-related oropharyngeal carcinoma has a favorable natural
history and responds better to treatment. Consequently, patients with this cancer
have better long-term survival than those with HPV-unrelated head and neck
squamous cell carcinoma (eg, 5-year overall survival rate of >80% versus ∼40% for
patients with stage III-IV tumors), and hence they are more likely to experience 
chronic therapy-induced morbidity. Therefore, changes in evaluation, staging, and
treatment are needed for this patient group. However, attempts to change the
treatment for HPV-associated oropharyngeal carcinoma should take place in a
closely monitored clinical trial setting. In this article, we summarize the
epidemiology, diagnosis, and clinical behavior of HPV-associated oropharyngeal
carcinoma, with emphasis on prognostic and biomarker discovery aspects, and
discuss briefly the current thoughts on changing the treatment paradigms aimed at
reducing morbidity while preserving the high tumor control probability through
well-coordinated prospective trials.

Copyright Â© 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.semradonc.2011.12.004 
PMID: 22385920  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
