
Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.


1395. Pharmacotherapy. 2011 Mar;31(3):280-97. doi: 10.1592/phco.31.3.280.

Clinical perspectives on the role of the human papillomavirus vaccine in the
prevention of cancer.

Julius JM(1), Ramondeta L, Tipton KA, Lal LS, Schneider K, Smith JA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pharmacy, The University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston, Texas, USA.

The role of human papillomavirus (HPV) in the genesis of cervical cancer has been
well documented, and an increasing body of literature exists with regard to the
role of HPV in other cancers, including cancers of the head and neck. With the
recent expansion of the United States Food and Drug Administration's approval of 
the quadrivalent HPV virus-like particle vaccine to include men and boys and
approval of the bivalent vaccine this year, the controversies regarding who
should be vaccinated, at what age is vaccination most appropriate, and the
limitations of the available HPV vaccines are increasing. Health care providers
are challenged with evaluating the current, but continually changing, clinical
evidence when making critical decisions for their patients. A literature search
of MEDLINE and SciVerse Scopus was conducted for articles published from
1998-April 2010 regarding HPV, HPV-related cancers, and HPV vaccines. Although
both HPV vaccines were greater than 90% effective in the prevention of cervical
cancer precursors in an according-to-protocol cohort, both vaccines were
significantly less effective in the intent-to-treat population. In patients who
achieved seroconversion, the geometric mean titers decrease dramatically within
the first 2 years after vaccination, and then continue to decline at a slower
rate. No effective antibody titer has been defined for either vaccine, and no
studies have been conducted with documented HPV exposure after vaccination. With 
low efficacy rates in an intent-to-treat population and the potential for waning 
immunity, it is imperative for women to continue to receive regular Pap tests and
gynecologic examinations. Although vaccine administration was shown to be
cost-effective when administered to adolescent girls, many of these simulations
overestimated the durability of protection, efficacy rates in sexually active
women, impact of incomplete vaccination, or necessity of boosters in the future. 
Whereas the introduction of the HPV vaccine was an enormous advancement in the
cancer prevention research arena, optimization of its clinical use is still
needed.

DOI: 10.1592/phco.31.3.280 
PMID: 21361739  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
