
Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare there are no potential
conflicts of interest.


1411. PLoS One. 2015 Jul 7;10(7):e0132325. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0132325.
eCollection 2015.

Differences in Transcriptional Activity of Human Papillomavirus Type 6 Molecular 
Variants in Recurrent Respiratory Papillomatosis.

Measso do Bonfim C(1), Simão Sobrinho J(2), Lacerda Nogueira R(3), Salgado Kupper
D(3), Cardoso Pereira Valera F(3), Lacerda Nogueira M(4), Villa LL(5), Rahal
P(1), Sichero L(2).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Genomic Studies, Universidade do Estado de São Paulo, UNESP, São
José do Rio Preto, SP, Brazil.
(2)Molecular Biology Laboratory, Center of Translational Oncology, Instituto do
Câncer do Estado de São Paulo, ICESP, São Paulo, Brazil.
(3)Department of Ophthalmology/Otorhinolaryngology and Head/Neck Surgery,
Discipline Otorhinolaryngology, Faculty of Medicine of Ribeirão Preto,
Universidade de São Paulo, USP, São Paulo, Brazil.
(4)Laboratory of Research in Virology, Faculty of Medicine of São José do Rio
Preto, FAMERP, São José do Rio Preto, Brazil.
(5)Molecular Biology Laboratory, Center of Translational Oncology, Instituto do
Câncer do Estado de São Paulo, ICESP, São Paulo, Brazil; Department of Radiology 
and Oncology, School of Medicine, Universidade de São Paulo, USP, São Paulo,
Brazil; School of Medicine, Santa Casa de São Paulo and HPV Institute, São Paulo,
Brazil.

A significant proportion of recurrent respiratory papillomatosis (RRP) is caused 
by human papillomavirus type 6 (HPV-6). The long control region (LCR) contains
cis-elements for regulation of transcription. Our aim was to characterize LCR
HPV-6 variants in RRP cases, compare promoter activity of these isolates and
search for cellular transcription factors (TFs) that could explain the
differences observed. The complete LCR from 13 RRP was analyzed. Transcriptional 
activity of 5 variants was compared using luciferase assays. Differences in
putative TFs binding sites among variants were revealed using the TRANSFAC
database. Chromatin immunoprecipation (CHIP) and luciferase assays were used to
evaluate TF binding and impact upon transcription, respectively. Juvenile-onset
RRP cases harbored exclusively HPV-6vc related variants, whereas among
adult-onset cases HPV-6a variants were more prevalent. The HPV-6vc reference was 
more transcriptionally active than the HPV-6a reference. Active FOXA1, ELF1 and
GATA1 binding sites overlap variable nucleotide positions among isolates and
influenced LCR activity. Furthermore, our results support a crucial role for ELF1
on transcriptional downregulation. We identified TFs implicated in the regulation
of HPV-6 early gene expression. Many of these factors are mutated in cancer or
are putative cancer biomarkers, and must be further studied.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0132325 
PMCID: PMC4494706
PMID: 26151558  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
