

1420. Indian J Cancer. 2018 Jan-Mar;55(1):4-8. doi: 10.4103/ijc.IJC_475_17.

Implementing American Joint Committee on Cancer 8th edition for head-and-neck
cancer in India: Context, feasibility, and practicality.

Subramaniam N(1), Thankappan K(1), Anand A(1), Balasubramanian D(1), Iyer S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Head and Neck Surgery and Oncology, Amrita Institute of Medical 
Sciences, Amrita University, Kochi, Kerala, India.

The American Joint Committee on Cancer (AJCC) 8th edition marks a paradigm shift 
in the staging of head-and-neck cancers. It introduces several novel
considerations into the staging of head-and-neck cancer, with distinct
therapeutic ramifications, to stage and prognosticate patients better. In oral
cancer, it introduces the depth of invasion as a determinant of T-stage. The
nodal staging recommendations have also upstaged extranodal extension, which has 
been shown to be a high-risk adverse feature associated with worse survival. In
oropharyngeal cancer, human papillomavirus (HPV) expression of tumors has been
used to reclassify tumors into two separate entities, with distinct staging
systems. For HPV-positive tumors, nodal staging has been divided into clinical
staging and pathological staging, for better prognostication of HPV-positive
diseases treated with surgery. In carcinoma of unknown primaries with cervical
nodal metastasis, immunohistochemical staining of nodal tissue for HPV and
Epstein-Barr virus has been recommended in all cases. These recommendations are
based on a high-quality evidence aimed at personalizing cancer therapy to
optimize outcomes while minimizing morbidity. The new recommendations address
many of the shortcomings of the previous editions. The practice of oncology in
India, however, is markedly different from that in the Western world. Majority of
these recommendations are universal; however, some are likely to have hurdles in 
implementation in India.

DOI: 10.4103/ijc.IJC_475_17 
PMID: 30147086  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
