

1440. Oncotarget. 2015 Apr 20;6(11):9627-42.

Head and neck cancer subtypes with biological and clinical relevance:
Meta-analysis of gene-expression data.

De Cecco L(1), Nicolau M(2), Giannoccaro M(1), Daidone MG(3), Bossi P(4), Locati 
L(4), Licitra L(4), Canevari S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Functional Genomics and Bioinformatics, Department of Experimental Oncology
and Molecular Medicine, Fondazione IRCCS Istituto Nazionale dei Tumori, Milan,
Italy.
(2)Department of Mathematics, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA.
(3)Department of Experimental Oncology and Molecular Medicine, Fondazione IRCCS
Istituto Nazionale dei Tumori, Milan, Italy.
(4)Head and Neck Medical Oncology Unit, Fondazione IRCCS Istituto Nazionale dei
Tumori, Milan, Italy.

Head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) is a disease with heterogeneous
clinical behavior and response to therapies. Despite the introduction of
multimodality treatment, 40-50% of patients with advanced disease recur.
Therefore, there is an urgent need to improve the classification beyond the
current parameters in clinical use to better stratify patients and the
therapeutic approaches. Following a meta-analysis approach we built a large
training set to whom we applied a Disease-Specific Genomic Analysis (DSGA) to
identify the disease component embedded into the tumor data. Eleven independent
microarray datasets were used as validation sets. Six different HNSCC subtypes
that summarize the aberrant alterations occurring during tumor progression were
identified. Based on their main biological characteristics and de-regulated
signaling pathways, the subtypes were designed as immunoreactive, inflammatory,
human papilloma virus (HPV)-like, classical, hypoxia associated, and mesenchymal.
Our findings highlighted a more aggressive behavior for mesenchymal and
hypoxia-associated subtypes. The Genomics Drug Sensitivity Project was used to
identify potential associations with drug sensitivity and significant differences
were observed among the six subtypes. To conclude, we report a robust molecularly
defined subtype classification in HNSCC that can improve patient selection and
pave the way to the development of appropriate therapeutic strategies.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.3301 
PMCID: PMC4496244
PMID: 25821127  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
