

1448. Ann Surg Oncol. 2009 Oct;16(10):2908-17. doi: 10.1245/s10434-009-0579-1. Epub
2009 Jul 15.

Prognostic significance of vascular endothelial growth factor in squamous cell
carcinomas of the tonsil in relation to human papillomavirus status and epidermal
growth factor receptor.

Fei J(1), Hong A, Dobbins TA, Jones D, Lee CS, Loo C, Al-Ghamdi M, Harnett GB,
Clark J, O'Brien CJ, Rose B.

Author information: 
(1)The Sydney Head and Neck Cancer Institute, Sydney Cancer Centre, Royal Prince 
Alfred Hospital, Sydney, NSW, Australia.

BACKGROUND: Angiogenesis markers, vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) and
microvessel density (MVD) have been associated with prognosis in squamous cell
carcinomas (SCCs) of the head and neck. Other prognostic variables such as human 
papillomavirus (HPV) and epidermal growth factor (EGFR) may also be involved in
tumour angiogenesis. This study determined relationships between VEGF, MVD, EGFR,
HPV, response to radiotherapy and clinical outcome in 85 tonsillar SCCs.
METHODS: HPV status was determined by an HPV multiplex real-time polymerase chain
reaction (PCR) assay/p16 immunohistochemistry. Expression of VEGF, CD31 (as
marker of MVD) and EGFR was assessed by semiquantitative immunohistochemistry.
RESULTS: Strong VEGF expressers were significantly more likely to have higher MVD
than were weak expressers. There were no associations between VEGF or MVD and
gender, patient age, TNM stage, EGFR expression or HPV status. Tumours with MVD
of >15 per high-power field were significantly more likely to be poorly
differentiated. There was a significant inverse relationship between EGFR and HPV
status. HPV was a strong independent marker of loco-regional recurrence and
death. VEGF and EGFR were risk factors for local recurrence and disease-specific 
death on univariate analysis but the associations weakened after adjustment for
HPV. Among patients treated with radiotherapy, VEGF was associated with
disease-specific death after adjusting for HPV and TMN stage.
High-VEGF-expressing tumours positive for EGFR had a worse prognosis than all
other groups combined after adjusting for HPV and TNM stage.
CONCLUSIONS: HPV is a stronger prognostic marker than VEGF or EGFR in tonsillar
SCCs. VEGF correlates with MVD in these tumours.

DOI: 10.1245/s10434-009-0579-1 
PMID: 19603236  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
