

1460. Oncotarget. 2016 Aug 9;7(32):51320-51334. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.9710.

16S rRNA amplicon sequencing identifies microbiota associated with oral cancer,
human papilloma virus infection and surgical treatment.

Guerrero-Preston R(1)(2), Godoy-Vitorino F(3), Jedlicka A(4), Rodríguez-Hilario
A(3), González H(3), Bondy J(1), Lawson F(1), Folawiyo O(1), Michailidi C(1),
Dziedzic A(4), Thangavel R(5), Hadar T(1), Noordhuis MG(1)(6), Westra W(7), Koch 
W(1), Sidransky D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology and Head and Neck Surgery, Johns Hopkins
University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland, USA.
(2)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Puerto Rico School of
Medicine, San Juan, Puerto Rico.
(3)Natural Sciences Department, Microbial Ecology and Genomics Laboratory, Inter 
American University of Puerto Rico, Metropolitan Campus, San Juan, Puerto Rico.
(4)Department of Molecular Microbiology and Immunology, Johns Hopkins University 
School of Public Health, Baltimore, Maryland, USA.
(5)Department of Microbiology, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York,
New York, USA.
(6)Department of Otorhinolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, University of
Groningen, University Medical Center, Groningen, The Netherlands.
(7)Department of Pathology-Surgical Pathology, Johns Hopkins University School of
Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland, USA.

Systemic inflammatory events and localized disease, mediated by the microbiome,
may be measured in saliva as head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC)
diagnostic and prognostic biomonitors. We used a 16S rRNA V3-V5 marker gene
approach to compare the saliva microbiome in DNA isolated from Oropharyngeal
(OPSCC), Oral Cavity Squamous Cell Carcinoma (OCSCC) patients and normal
epithelium controls, to characterize the HNSCC saliva microbiota and examine
their abundance before and after surgical resection.The analyses identified a
predominance of Firmicutes, Proteobacteria and Bacteroidetes, with less frequent 
presence of Actinobacteria and Fusobacteria before surgery. At lower taxonomic
levels, the most abundant genera were Streptococcus, Prevotella, Haemophilus,
Lactobacillus and Veillonella, with lower numbers of Citrobacter and Neisseraceae
genus Kingella. HNSCC patients had a significant loss in richness and diversity
of microbiota species (p<0.05) compared to the controls. Overall, the Operational
Taxonomic Units network shows that the relative abundance of OTU's within genus
Streptococcus, Dialister, and Veillonella can be used to discriminate tumor from 
control samples (p<0.05). Tumor samples lost Neisseria, Aggregatibacter
(Proteobacteria), Haemophillus (Firmicutes) and Leptotrichia (Fusobacteria).
Paired taxa within family Enterobacteriaceae, together with genus Oribacterium,
distinguish OCSCC samples from OPSCC and normal samples (p<0.05). Similarly, only
HPV positive samples have an abundance of genus Gemellaceae and Leuconostoc
(p<0.05). Longitudinal analyses of samples taken before and after surgery,
revealed a reduction in the alpha diversity measure after surgery, together with 
an increase of this measure in patients that recurred (p<0.05). These results
suggest that microbiota may be used as HNSCC diagnostic and prognostic
biomonitors.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.9710 
PMCID: PMC5239478
PMID: 27259999  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
