
Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts of interest with
the subject matter or materials discussed in this manuscript.


1461. J Pathol. 2017 Nov;243(3):354-365. doi: 10.1002/path.4953. Epub 2017 Oct 6.

Comprehensive T-cell immunophenotyping and next-generation sequencing of human
papillomavirus (HPV)-positive and HPV-negative head and neck squamous cell
carcinomas.

Poropatich K(1), Fontanarosa J(2), Swaminathan S(3), Dittmann D(1), Chen S(4),
Samant S(2), Zhang B(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine
Chicago, IL, USA.
(2)Department of Otolaryngology, Northwestern University, Feinberg Medical
School, Chicago, IL, USA.
(3)Robert H. Lurie Comprehensive Cancer Center, Department of Medicine - Division
of Rheumatology, Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago,
IL, USA.
(4)Robert H. Lurie Comprehensive Cancer Center, Department of Medicine - Division
of Hematology/Oncology, Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine,
Chicago, IL, USA.

The success of programmed cell death 1 (PD-1) inhibition in achieving a clinical 
response in a subset of head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) patients
emphasizes the need to better understand the immunobiology of HNSCC.
Immunophenotyping was performed for 30 HCSCC patients [16 human papillomavirus
(HPV)-positive; 14 HPV-negative] on matched tissue from the primary tumour site, 
locally metastatic cervical lymph nodes (LNs), uninvolved local cervical LNs, and
peripheral blood. CD4+ and CD8+ T-cell lymphocytes obtained from tissue were
analysed for expression levels of the inhibitory receptors PD-1, TIM-3 and
CTLA-4. Next-generation sequencing of the T-cell receptor (TCR) β chain was
performed on patients (n = 9) to determine receptor repertoire diversity and for 
clonality analysis. HPV-negative HNSCC patients, particularly those with stage IV
disease, had significantly higher proportions of CD8+ T cells expressing CTLA-4
in tumour tissue (P = 0.0013) and in peripheral blood (P = 0.0344) than
HPV-positive patients, as well as higher expression levels of TIM-3+ PD-1+ CD8+ T
cells (P = 0.0072) than controls. For all patients, PD-1 expression on CD8+ T
cells - particularly in HPV-negative HNSCC cases - strongly correlated (r = 0.63,
P = 0.013) with tumour size at the primary site. The top CD8+ TCR clones from
tumour tissue significantly overlapped with circulating peripheral blood TCR
clones (r = 0.946), and HPV-positive patients had frequently expanded TCR clones 
that were more hydrophobic - and potentially more immunogenic - than those from
HPV-negative patients. Collectively, our findings demonstrate, for the first
time, that high-stage HPV-negative HNSCC patients with primary tumours at
different sites in the head and neck have elevated peripheral CTLA-4+ CD8+ T-cell
levels, that tumour-familiar CD8+ T cells are detectable in peripheral blood from
HNSCC patients, and that TCRs from HPV-positive HNSCC patients potentially
recognize distinctly immunogenic cognate antigens. However, our findings are
preliminary, and need to be further confirmed in a larger patient cohort; also,
how these factors affect patient response to immunotherapy needs to be
determined. Copyright © 2017 Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland.
Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

Copyright © 2017 Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland. Published by 
John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/path.4953 
PMID: 28771750  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
