

1475. Curr Treat Options Oncol. 2014 Dec;15(4):595-610. doi: 10.1007/s11864-014-0309-1.

Human papillomavirus-associated oropharynx cancer (HPV-OPC): treatment options.

Chau NG(1), Rabinowits G, Haddad RI.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Head and Neck Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard
Medical School, 450 Brookline Ave, Boston, MA, 02215, USA,
Nicole_chau@dfci.harvard.edu.

OPINION STATEMENT: Human papillomavirus-associated oropharynx cancer (HPV-OPC) is
growing in incidence and has distinct clinical, pathologic, molecular, and
epidemiologic features. However, the management of HPV-OPC does not presently
differ from HPV-negative OPC based on the current evidence and requires complex
multidisciplinary approaches. The superior prognosis of HPV-OPC and the
toxicities of current multimodality treatment in a young population serve as the 
impetus to evaluate de-intensification treatment regimens aimed at reducing
toxicity while maintaining therapeutic efficacy. Clinical trials are underway to 
evaluate reduced doses of radiation or less toxic systemic therapy regimens in
HPV-OPC. Minimally invasive surgical approaches in the HPV-OPC population with
early tumor stage also are being investigated. De-intensification strategies
should only be employed in the context of clinical trials, and HPV-OPC patients
should be offered clinical trials' participation. Appropriate patient selection
is critical to the development of de-intensification regimens, and this requires 
greater understanding of risk factors within the HPV-OPC population, HPV-OPC
biology, and how HPV modulates response to specific therapies. Smoking history
and bulky nodal disease have been shown to impact negatively the favorable
prognosis of HPV association. Validated biomarkers within the HPV-OPC population 
are lacking, although alterations in the PI3K pathway and markers of immune
response may emerge as important considerations in the future. Novel therapeutic 
strategies are desperately needed particularly for HPV-OPC patients who fail
definitive therapy, and select patients with recurrent or metastatic disease may 
benefit from aggressive approaches.

DOI: 10.1007/s11864-014-0309-1 
PMID: 25240410  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
