

1478. PLoS Pathog. 2018 May 10;14(5):e1007062. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1007062.
eCollection 2018 May.

Metabolic reprogramming of Kaposi's sarcoma associated herpes virus infected
B-cells in hypoxia.

Singh RK(1), Lang F(1), Pei Y(1), Jha HC(2), Robertson ES(1).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Otorhinolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery and Microbiology,
Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, United
States of America.
(2)Discipline of Biosciences and Biomedical Engineering, Indian Institute of
Technology, Indore, Madhya Pradesh, India.

Kaposi's sarcoma associated herpesvirus (KSHV) infection stabilizes hypoxia
inducible factors (HIFs). The interaction between KSHV encoded factors and HIFs
plays a critical role in KSHV latency, reactivation and associated disease
phenotypes. Besides modulation of large-scale signaling, KSHV infection also
reprograms the metabolic activity of infected cells. However, the mechanism and
cellular pathways modulated during these changes are poorly understood. We
performed comparative RNA sequencing analysis on cells with stabilized hypoxia
inducible factor 1 alpha (HIF1α) of KSHV negative or positive background to
identify changes in global and metabolic gene expression. Our results show that
hypoxia induces glucose dependency of KSHV positive cells with high glucose
uptake and high lactate release. We identified the KSHV-encoded vGPCR, as a novel
target of HIF1α and one of the main viral antigens of this metabolic
reprogramming. Bioinformatics analysis of vGPCR promoter identified 9 distinct
hypoxia responsive elements which were activated by HIF1α in-vitro. Expression of
vGPCR alone was sufficient for induction of changes in the metabolic phenotype
similar to those induced by KSHV under hypoxic conditions. Silencing of HIF1α
rescued the hypoxia associated phenotype of KSHV positive cells. Analysis of the 
host transcriptome identified several common targets of hypoxia as well as KSHV
encoded factors and other synergistically activated genes belonging to cellular
pathways. These include those involved in carbohydrate, lipid and amino acids
metabolism. Further DNA methyltranferases, DNMT3A and DNMT3B were found to be
regulated by either KSHV, hypoxia, or both synergistically at the transcript and 
protein levels. This study showed distinct and common, as well as synergistic
effects of HIF1α and KSHV-encoded proteins on metabolic reprogramming of
KSHV-infected cells in the hypoxia.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1007062 
PMCID: PMC5963815
PMID: 29746587  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
