

1481. Int J Clin Exp Pathol. 2014 Apr 15;7(5):2430-7. eCollection 2014.

Spectrum of Epstein-Barr virus-associated T-cell lymphoproliferative disorder in 
adolescents and young adults in Taiwan.

Wang RC(1), Chang ST(2), Hsieh YC(3), Huang WT(4), Hsu JD(5), Tseng CE(6), Wang
MC(7), Hwang WS(8), Wang J(1), Chuang SS(9).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Taichung Veterans General
Hospital Taichung, Taiwan.
(2)Department of Pathology, Chi-Mei Medical Center, and Department of Nursing,
National Tainan Institute of Nursing Tainan, Taiwan.
(3)Department of Pathology, Chi-Mei Medical Center, and Department of Medical
Laboratory Science and Biotechnology, Chung Hwa University of Medical Technology 
Tainan, Taiwan.
(4)Department of Pathology, Kaohsiung Chang Gung Memorial Hospital and Chang Gung
University College of Medicine Kaohsiung, Taiwan.
(5)Department of Pathology, Chung Shan Medical University Hospital and School of 
Medicine, Chung Shan Medical University Taichung, Taiwan.
(6)Department of Anatomic Pathology, Buddhist Dalin Tzu Chi Hospital Chiayi,
Taiwan ; School of Medicine, Buddhist Tzu Chi University Hualien, Taiwan.
(7)Division of Hematology, Department of Internal Medicine, Chang Gung Memorial
Hospital-Kaohsiung Medical Center, and Chang Gung University College of Medicine 
Kaohsiung, Taiwan.
(8)Division of Hematology and Oncology, Department of Internal Medicine,
Chung-Shan Medical University Hospital and School of Medicine, Chung-Shan Medical
University Taichung, Taiwan.
(9)Department of Pathology, Chi-Mei Medical Center Tainan, Taiwan ; Taipei
Medical University and National Taiwan University Taipei, Taiwan.

Epstein-Barr Virus (EBV) is a herpesvirus usually infecting B-cells but may
occasionally infect T- or natural killer (NK)-cells. EBV-associated T- or NK-cell
lymphoproliferations represent a continuous spectrum of diseases ranging from
asymptomatic infection, infectious mononucleosis (IM), to clonal and malignant
lymphoproliferations including systemic EBV-positive T/NK-cell
lymphoproliferative disease (EBV-T/NK-LPD) of childhood and
hydroa-vacciniforme-like lymphoma of the skin. The clonal diseases are more
prevalent in East Asia and exhibit overlapping clinical and pathological features
with chronic active EBV infection. Here we report our experience on 10 cases of
EBV-associated T-cell lymphoproliferation from Taiwan including five males and
five females with a median age of 18 years old (range, 15-28). The most common
clinical symptoms were fever, neck mass and hepatosplenomegaly. Eight of these
patients showed elevated lactate dehydrogenase level and half of the patients had
cytopenia. All patients had either elevated EBV antibody titers or increased
serum EBV DNA levels. Five cases were clinically IM-like with polyclonal (3
cases) or clonal (2 cases) T-cell lymphoproliferation. Two patients each had
chronic active EBV infection (CAEBV) and hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis
(HLH). One patient had both CAEBV and HLH. One of the HLH patients with marrow
infiltration by intra-sinusoidal large atypical lymphocytes experienced a
fulminant course. In a median follow-up time of 21.5 months, seven patients were 
free of disease, one was alive with disease, and two died of disease in 31 and 3 
months, respectively, despite chemotherapy. We confirmed a wide
clinicopathological range of EVB-associated T-cell lymphoproliferation in Taiwan.
Furthermore, monomorphic LPD and the single case with fulminant course as defined
by Ohshima et al (Pathol Int 2018) as categories A3 and B, respectively, died of 
disease despite chemotherapy. Our report, the largest series in the recent decade
from Taiwan, adds to the understanding of these rare diseases with variable
clinical and histopathological presentations.


PMCID: PMC4069894
PMID: 24966953  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
