

1486. Histopathology. 2017 May;70(6):880-888. doi: 10.1111/his.13162. Epub 2017 Feb 24.

Human papillomavirus-related carcinoma with adenoid cystic-like features of the
sinonasal tract: clinical and morphological characterization of six new cases.

Andreasen S(1)(2), Bishop JA(3), Hansen TV(4), Westra WH(3), Bilde A(1), von
Buchwald C(1), Kiss K(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery and Audiology,
Copenhagen University Hospital, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(2)Department of Otorhinolaryngology and Maxillofacial Surgery, Zealand
University Hospital, Køge, Denmark.
(3)Departments of Pathology, Otolaryngology and Oncology, Johns Hopkins Medical
Institutions, Baltimore, MD, USA.
(4)Genomic Medicine, Copenhagen University Hospital, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(5)Department of Pathology, Copenhagen University Hospital, Copenhagen, Denmark.

AIMS: Human papillomavirus (HPV) is known as causative for squamous cell
carcinoma (SCC) of the oropharynx, but is also found not infrequently in
carcinomas of the sinonasal tract. Recently, a subset of these carcinomas was
recognized to harbour HPV33 and have a significant morphological overlap with
adenoid cystic carcinoma (ACC), a rare and aggressive carcinoma originating in
the minor salivary glands. Termed 'HPV-related carcinoma with ACC-like features',
only nine cases have been reported. To clarify the occurrence of these tumours we
screened a large material for the presence of HPV-related ACC-like carcinoma. The
identified tumours were characterized immunohistochemically and with fluorescence
in-situ hybridization, and clinicopathological information for all cases is
presented.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Forty-seven candidate cases were screened for presence of
HPV. Six cases were identified and genotyped as HPV types 33, 35, and 56. All six
cases had areas of dysplastic mucosal lining and showed remarkable heterogeneous 
morphologies. MYB, MYBL1, and NFIB genes were intact and, interestingly, staining
for MYB protein was largely negative in contrast to what was found in ACC. One
patient experienced a local recurrence 11 years after initial treatment and the
remaining five patients were alive without evidence of disease.
CONCLUSION: We report six new cases of HPV-related ACC-like carcinoma and found
that, although in a small material, the prognosis for these patients seems more
favourable than for ACC. For the distinction between ACC and HPV-related ACC-like
carcinoma, p16, MYB immunohistochemistry or investigation of MYB, MYBL1 and NFIB 
gene status are valuable.

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/his.13162 
PMID: 28035703  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
