

1494. Am J Surg Pathol. 2017 Dec;41(12):1690-1701. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0000000000000944.

HPV-related Multiphenotypic Sinonasal Carcinoma: An Expanded Series of 49 Cases
of the Tumor Formerly Known as HPV-related Carcinoma With Adenoid Cystic
Carcinoma-like Features.

Bishop JA(1), Andreasen S, Hang JF, Bullock MJ, Chen TY, Franchi A, Garcia JJ,
Gnepp DR, Gomez-Fernandez CR, Ihrler S, Kuo YJ, Lewis JS Jr, Magliocca KR,
Pambuccian S, Sandison A, Uro-Coste E, Stelow E, Kiss K, Westra WH.

Author information: 
(1)*Departments of Pathology, Oncology, and Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery,
The Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD †Department of Pathology, University 
of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX Departments of
‡Otorhinolaryngology Head & Neck Surgery and Audiology ¶¶¶Pathology, Copenhagen
University Hospital, Copenhagen §Department of Otorhinolaryngology and
Maxillofacial Surgery, Zealand University Hospital, Køge, Denmark ∥Department of 
Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Taipei Veterans General Hospital ¶School of
Medicine, National Yang-Ming University, Taipei, Taiwan #Department of Pathology,
Dalhousie University, Halifax, NS, Canada **Mayo Clinic School of Medicine, Mayo 
Clinic ‡‡Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic Rochester, 
Rochester, MN ††Department of Translational Research and New Technologies in
Medicine, University of Pisa, Pisa, Italy §§Department of Pathology, Warren
Alpert School of Medicine at Brown University (retired), Providence, RI
∥∥Department of Pathology, University of Miami, Miami, FL ¶¶Laboratory for
Dermatohistology and Oral Pathology, Munich, Germany ##Department of Pathology,
Microbiology, and Immunology, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, TN
***Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Emory University, Atlanta, GA
†††Department of Pathology, Loyola University Medical Center, Chicago, IL
‡‡‡Department of Pathology, Imperial College, London, United Kingdom
§§§Department of Pathology, University of Toulouse, Toulouse, France
∥∥∥Department of Pathology, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA.

Human papillomavirus (HPV)-related multiphenotypic sinonasal carcinoma (HMSC),
originally known as HPV-related carcinoma with adenoid cystic carcinoma-like
features, is a peculiar neoplasm that is restricted to the sinonasal tract,
exhibits features of both a surface-derived and salivary gland carcinoma
(particularly adenoid cystic carcinoma), and is associated with high-risk HPV.
Given the limited number of published cases, the full clinicopathologic spectrum 
of this neoplasm is unclear. Here, we present an updated experience of 49 cases. 
All cases of HMSC were obtained from the authors' files. Immunohistochemistry for
p16, c-kit, and myoepithelial cell markers (S100, actin, calponin, p63, and/or
p40) was performed along with RNA in situ hybridization for HPV (type 33-specific
as well as a high-risk cocktail). Fluorescence in situ hybridization studies for 
fusions of MYB, NFIB, and MYBL1 was performed on a subset of cases. Clinical
follow-up was obtained from medical records. A total of 49 cases of HMSC were
collected. Twenty-eight (57%) were from women and 18 (43%) from men, ranging in
age from 28 to 90 years (mean, 54 y). Of 40 cases with detailed staging
information, 43% of HMSCs presented with a high T-stage (T3 or T4).
Histologically, most grew predominantly as solid nests of basaloid cells
exhibiting high mitotic rates and frequent necrosis, with histologic and
immunohistochemical evidence of myoepithelial differentiation. Most cases also
demonstrated foci of cribriform and/or tubular growth, along with an
inconspicuous population of ducts. Thirty-four (69%) cases demonstrated an
unusual pattern of surface involvement where markedly atypical squamous cells
colonized tracts of the sinonasal mucosa. Less consistent histologic features
included squamous differentiation within the invasive tumor (n=6), sarcomatoid
transformation (n=5) including overt chondroid differentiation (n=3), and
prominent epithelial-myoepithelial carcinoma-like growth (n=3). All cases were
positive for p16 by immunostaining and HPV by RNA in situ hybridization.
Thirty-three (67%) were positive for HPV 33. No cases tested for MYB, MYBL1, or
NFIB gene fusions were positive. In the 38 cases with follow-up data, (mean
follow-up, 42 mo) 14 recurred locally and 2 metastasized (lung, finger). There
were no regional lymph node metastases, and no tumor-related deaths. HMSC is a
distinct sinonasal neoplasm characterized by myoepithelial differentiation,
frequent surface epithelial involvement, and the presence of high-risk HPV
(especially type 33). Although it classically exhibits a cribriforming pattern
that closely resembles adenoid cystic carcinoma, our expanded series highlights a
histologic spectrum that is much broader than previously recognized, warranting a
change in terminology. HMSC usually presents as a large and destructive sinonasal
mass with high-grade histologic features, but it paradoxically behaves in a
relatively indolent manner, underscoring the importance of distinguishing HMSC
from true adenoid cystic carcinoma, squamous cell carcinoma, and other histologic
mimickers.

DOI: 10.1097/PAS.0000000000000944 
PMCID: PMC5680105
PMID: 28877065  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
