

1510. Am J Otolaryngol. 2010 Jul-Aug;31(4):291-6. doi: 10.1016/j.amjoto.2009.02.019.
Epub 2009 Jul 10.

Malignant transformation of a highly aggressive human papillomavirus type
11-associated recurrent respiratory papillomatosis.

Lin HW(1), Richmon JD, Emerick KS, de Venecia RK, Zeitels SM, Faquin WC, Lin DT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Massachusetts Eye and Ear 
Infirmary, Boston, MA 02114, USA. harrison_lin@meei.harvard.edu

OBJECTIVE: The objective is to present an uncommon case of squamous cell
carcinoma (SCC) arising from extensive recurrent respiratory papillomatosis (RRP)
involving the upper and lower airway and temporal bone.
STUDY DESIGN: This is a case report and a review of the literature.
METHODS: We describe a case of a 24-year-old woman with a history of human
papillomavirus (HPV) type 11 since childhood originating in the larynx and
trachea, then progressing to involve the distal pulmonary alveoli and right
middle ear through the eustachian tube. Papillomatous growth was treated with
multiple surgeries including laser cytoreduction of laryngotracheal
papillomatosis and radical mastoidectomy, followed by a trial of chemotherapy.
Despite this aggressive treatment regimen, papillomatous growth progressed with
recurrence in the right eustachian tube, middle ear, and mastoid eventually
extending to involve the calvaria and scalp.
RESULTS: The patient underwent a composite resection of involved tissues,
including the scalp, auricle, and lateral temporal bone, with reconstruction
using a latissimus dorsi free flap. Final pathologic analysis revealed an
extensive infiltrative well-differentiated SCC arising from the papilloma. A
review of the literature on aggressive respiratory papillomatosis suggests that
malignant transformation of juvenile-onset RRP occurs exclusively in cases
positive for HPV-11.
CONCLUSIONS: We report an unusual case of SCC originating from extensive RRP
involving the airway, temporal bone, and scalp and describe the medical and
surgical management. Although the incidence of juvenile-onset RRP transformation 
to SCC is very low, the presence of HPV-11 as a risk factor for malignant
transformation of RRP is becoming evident.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.amjoto.2009.02.019 
PMID: 20015762  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
