

1522. J Vector Borne Dis. 2017 Jan-Mar;54(1):35-43.

Seroprevalence and clinical manifestations of chikungunya virus infection in
rural areas of Chandrapur, Maharashtra, India.

Kawle AP(1), Nayak AR(1), Bhullar SS(1), Borkar SR(1), Patankar SD(2), Daginawala
HF(1), Singh LR(1), Kashyap RS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Biochemistry Research Centre, Central India Institute of Medical Sciences,
Nagpur, India.
(2)Guru Nanak College of Science, Chandrapur, Maharashtra, India.

BACKGROUND & OBJECTIVES: Chikungunya virus (CHIKV) infection has recently
witnessed re-emergence, affecting rural areas of India with high morbidity rates.
This prospective study was conducted to evaluate seroprevalence and clinical
manifestation in targeted villages reporting cases of CHIKV infection.
METHODS: A total of 482 patients were recruited from Kalmana and Kothari villages
of Ballarpur; Chandrapur district of Maharashtra state, India during CHIKV
outbreaks in 2011-12. The serum samples from infected CHIKV patients were
simultaneously screened through ELISA for detection of antigen and antibodies
(IgM and IgG). Chi-square analysis was used to evaluate differences in
seropositivity between age, gender and clinical manifestations of CHIKV.
RESULTS: Out of 482 enrolled participants, 197 (41%) males and 285 (59%) females 
were aged between 5 and 92 yr. The clinical manifestations such as small joint
pain (80%), neck stiffness (75%), fever (49%) and large joint pain (47%) were
observed amongst CHIKV infected subjects. Mucocutaneous rashes (91%) on knees
(71%), feet (56%), fingers and palms (54%) were also observed. Overall,
seroprevalence of CHIKV infection was found to be 46% in infected participants
during the epidemic period. Among risk factors, ageing and female gender was
strongly associated with a raised seroprevalence of CHIKV infection along with
symptoms such as rashes, small joints pain and neck stiffness.
INTERPRETATION & CONCLUSION: This study reported high seroprevalence rates of
CHIKV infection in targeted popula- tions, suggesting its re-emergence in rural
India. Proper surveillance is, therefore, necessary to minimize re-emergence and 
in controlling these impending and sporadic outbreaks.


PMID: 28352044  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
