

1530. PLoS Med. 2015 Feb 10;12(2):e1001786. doi: 10.1371/journal.pmed.1001786.
eCollection 2015 Feb.

Intra-tumor genetic heterogeneity and mortality in head and neck cancer: analysis
of data from the Cancer Genome Atlas.

Mroz EA(1), Tward AD, Hammon RJ(3), Ren Y(3), Rocco JW(4).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Cancer Research and Division of Surgical Oncology, Massachusetts
General Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts, United States of America.
(2)Department of Otology and Laryngology, Harvard Medical School and
Massachusetts Eye and Ear Infirmary, Boston, Massachusetts, United States of
America; The Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, Massachusetts, United
States of America.
(3)Department of Otology and Laryngology, Harvard Medical School and
Massachusetts Eye and Ear Infirmary, Boston, Massachusetts, United States of
America.
(4)Center for Cancer Research and Division of Surgical Oncology, Massachusetts
General Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts, United States of America; Department of 
Otology and Laryngology, Harvard Medical School and Massachusetts Eye and Ear
Infirmary, Boston, Massachusetts, United States of America; Department of
Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio,
United States of America.

Erratum in
    PLoS Med. 2015 Mar;12(3):e1001818. Tward, Aaron M [corrected to Tward, Aaron D].
    PLoS Med. 2015 Jun;12(6):e1001844.

BACKGROUND: Although the involvement of intra-tumor genetic heterogeneity in
tumor progression, treatment resistance, and metastasis is established, genetic
heterogeneity is seldom examined in clinical trials or practice. Many studies of 
heterogeneity have had prespecified markers for tumor subpopulations, limiting
their generalizability, or have involved massive efforts such as separate
analysis of hundreds of individual cells, limiting their clinical use. We
recently developed a general measure of intra-tumor genetic heterogeneity based
on whole-exome sequencing (WES) of bulk tumor DNA, called mutant-allele tumor
heterogeneity (MATH). Here, we examine data collected as part of a large,
multi-institutional study to validate this measure and determine whether
intra-tumor heterogeneity is itself related to mortality.
METHODS AND FINDINGS: Clinical and WES data were obtained from The Cancer Genome 
Atlas in October 2013 for 305 patients with head and neck squamous cell carcinoma
(HNSCC), from 14 institutions. Initial pathologic diagnoses were between 1992 and
2011 (median, 2008). Median time to death for 131 deceased patients was 14 mo;
median follow-up of living patients was 22 mo. Tumor MATH values were calculated 
from WES results. Despite the multiple head and neck tumor subsites and the
variety of treatments, we found in this retrospective analysis a substantial
relation of high MATH values to decreased overall survival (Cox proportional
hazards analysis: hazard ratio for high/low heterogeneity, 2.2; 95% CI 1.4 to
3.3). This relation of intra-tumor heterogeneity to survival was not due to
intra-tumor heterogeneity's associations with other clinical or molecular
characteristics, including age, human papillomavirus status, tumor grade and TP53
mutation, and N classification. MATH improved prognostication over that provided 
by traditional clinical and molecular characteristics, maintained a significant
relation to survival in multivariate analyses, and distinguished outcomes among
patients having oral-cavity or laryngeal cancers even when standard disease
staging was taken into account. Prospective studies, however, will be required
before MATH can be used prognostically in clinical trials or practice. Such
studies will need to examine homogeneously treated HNSCC at specific head and
neck subsites, and determine the influence of cancer therapy on MATH values.
Analysis of MATH and outcome in human-papillomavirus-positive oropharyngeal
squamous cell carcinoma is particularly needed.
CONCLUSIONS: To our knowledge this study is the first to combine data from
hundreds of patients, treated at multiple institutions, to document a relation
between intra-tumor heterogeneity and overall survival in any type of cancer. We 
suggest applying the simply calculated MATH metric of heterogeneity to
prospective studies of HNSCC and other tumor types.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pmed.1001786 
PMCID: PMC4323109
PMID: 25668320  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
