

1535. Radiother Oncol. 2013 Sep;108(3):500-5. doi: 10.1016/j.radonc.2013.06.011. Epub
2013 Aug 13.

Radiosensitivity and effect of hypoxia in HPV positive head and neck cancer
cells.

Sørensen BS(1), Busk M, Olthof N, Speel EJ, Horsman MR, Alsner J, Overgaard J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Clinical Oncology, Aarhus University Hospital,
Denmark. Electronic address: bsin@mail.dk.

BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: HPV associated Head and Neck Squamous Cell Carcinoma
(HNSCC) represents a distinct subgroup of HNSCC characterized by a favorable
prognosis and a distinct molecular biology. Previous data from the randomized
DAHANCA 5 trial indicated that HPV positive tumors did not benefit from hypoxic
modifications by Nimorazole during radiotherapy, whereas a significant benefit
was observed in the HPV negative tumors. However, more studies have demonstrated 
equal frequencies of hypoxic tumors among HPV-positive and HPV-negative tumors.
The aim of the present study was to determine radiosensitivity, the impact of
hypoxia and the effect of Nimorazole in HPV positive and HPV negative cell lines.
MATERIALS AND METHOD: The used cell lines were: UDSCC2, UMSCC47 and UPCISCC90
(HPV positive) and FaDuDD, UTSCC33 and UTSCC5 (HPV negative). Cells were cultured
under normoxic or hypoxic conditions, and gene expression levels of previously
established hypoxia induced genes were assessed by qPCR. Cells were irradiated
with various doses under normoxia, hypoxia or hypoxia +1mM Nimorazole, and the
clonogenic survival was determined.
RESULTS: The HPV positive and HPV negative cell lines exhibited similar patterns 
of upregulation of hypoxia induced genes in response to hypoxia. The HPV positive
cell lines were up to 2.4 times more radiation sensitive than HPV negative cell
lines. However, all HPV positive cells displayed the same response to hypoxia in 
radiosensitivity, with an OER in the range 2.3-2.9, and a sensitizer effect of
Nimorazole of 1.13-1.29, similar to HPV negative cells.
CONCLUSIONS: Although HPV positive cells had a markedly higher radiosensitivity
compared to HPV negative cells, they displayed the same relative radioresistance 
under hypoxia and the same relative sensitizer effect of Nimorazole. The clinical
observation that HPV positive patients do not seem to benefit from Nimorazole
treatment is not due to inherent differences in hypoxia sensitivity or response
to Nimorazole, but can be accounted for by the overall higher radiosensitivity of
HPV positive cells.

Copyright © 2013. Published by Elsevier Ireland Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.radonc.2013.06.011 
PMID: 23953409  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
