

1537. Ear Nose Throat J. 2016 Apr-May;95(4-5):E30-4.

Synchronous bilateral tonsillar squamous cell carcinoma related to human
papillomavirus: Two case reports and a brief review of the literature.

Rasband-Lindquist A(1), Shnayder Y, O'Neil M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, University of Kansas
Medical Center, Mailstop 3010, 3901 Rainbow Blvd., Kansas City, KS 66160.
allisonrasband@gmail.com.

Human papillomavirus (HPV) was recently identified as a risk factor for
oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) independent of tobacco and alcohol
use. The prognosis of patients with HPV-related oropharyngeal carcinomas is
better than that for patients with non-HPV-related cancers. Researchers and
clinicians can test for HPV infection in cancer by (1) testing directly for HPV
DNA and (2) testing for overexpression of the downstream p16 protein; there is
currently no consensus regarding which is the better test. The chances of
developing a reliable oropharyngeal HPV screening test for high-risk populations 
are promising. Such a test would allow for secondary prevention by identifying
individuals with precursor or early-stage cancerous lesions that are more
amenable to treatment. HPV testing has particular significance in SCC of an
unknown primary site in head and neck cancer. Successful HPV testing of nodal
metastasis can localize cancer specifically to the oropharynx. The optimal
evaluation for SCC of an unknown primary in the head and neck has yet to be
determined. Some studies have shown that the tonsillar fossa is the most probable
primary site, followed closely by the base of the tongue. Biopsies often miss
tonsillar carcinoma in the deep crypts of the lymph tissue, as well as in those
rare cases in which the primary tumor is located contralateral to the metastatic 
lymph node. Recently, there has been an increase in the number of reports of
diagnosed synchronous bilateral HPV-related tonsillar carcinomas. This increase
has profound implications for the surgical approach of SCC of an unknown primary 
site in the head and neck and in tonsillar carcinoma, and it supports the need
for bilateral tonsillectomy. We present 2 cases of incidentally discovered
synchronous bilateral tonsillar carcinoma, and we review the literature.


PMID: 27140027  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
