

1549. Anticancer Res. 2016 Jun;36(6):2799-807.

Targeted Therapies in HPV-positive and -negative HNSCC - Alteration of EGFR and
VEGFR-2 Expression In Vitro.

Kramer B(1), Hock C(2), Birk R(2), Sauter A(2), Stuck BA(3), Hörmann K(2),
Schultz JD(2), Aderhold C(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology Head and Neck Surgery, University Hospital
Mannheim, Medical Faculty Mannheim, University Heidelberg, Mannheim, Germany
benedikt.kramer@umm.de.
(2)Department of Otorhinolaryngology Head and Neck Surgery, University Hospital
Mannheim, Medical Faculty Mannheim, University Heidelberg, Mannheim, Germany.
(3)Department of Otorhinolaryngology Head and Neck Surgery, University Hospital
Essen, University Duisburg-Essen, Essen, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Angiogenesis plays a crucial role in the formation and progression of
tumor growth in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC). The tyrosine
kinase receptors epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) and vascular endothelial
growth factor receptor (VEGFR) are essential for mediation of pro-angiogenic
signals. Nilotinib, dasatinib, erlotinib and gefitinib are tyrosine kinase
inhibitors and approved as targeted therapies for several tumor entities other
than HNSCC. In this study, we sought to evaluate the alteration of EGFR and
VEGFR-2 expression by these tyrosine kinase inhibitors with respect to the human 
papillomavirus (HPV)-status in squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) tumor cells.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Expression patterns of EGFR and VEGFR-2 were determined by
enzyme linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) in HNSCC 11A, HNSCC 14C and
p-16-positive CERV196 tumor cell lines. These cells were incubated with
nilotinib, dasatinib, erlotinib and gefitinib (5-20μmol/l) and compared to a
chemonaive control. The incubation time was 24, 48, 72 and 96 h.
RESULTS: All tested substances led to a statistically significant reduction
(p<0.05) of EGFR protein expression levels in HPV-negative cells compared to the 
negative control. Surprisingly, a statistically significant increase in VEGFR-2
expression was observed after exposure to all tested substances especially after 
exposure to erlotinib treatment.
CONCLUSION: Nilotinib, dasatinib, erlotinib and gefitinib cause significant
changes in protein expression of EGFR and VEGFR-2 in vitro. Besides the
anti-angiogenic impact of the substances, as shown for the decrease of EGFR
expression, we also observed an increase of VEGFR-2 expression. These
contradictive effects could be interpreted as a compensatory up-regulation by the
tumor cell.

Copyright© 2016 International Institute of Anticancer Research (Dr. John G.
Delinassios), All rights reserved.


PMID: 27272791  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
