

1551. Oncogene. 2015 Feb 12;34(7):868-77. doi: 10.1038/onc.2014.15. Epub 2014 Mar 10.

DEK promotes HPV-positive and -negative head and neck cancer cell proliferation.

Adams AK(1), Hallenbeck GE(1), Casper KA(2), Patil YJ(2), Wilson KM(2), Kimple
RJ(3), Lambert PF(3), Witte DP(4), Xiao W(5), Gillison ML(5), Wikenheiser-Brokamp
KA(6), Wise-Draper TM(7), Wells SI(1).

Author information: 
(1)Cancer and Blood Diseases Institute, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical
Center, Cincinnati, OH, USA.
(2)Department of Otolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, University of Cincinnati,
Cincinnati, OH, USA.
(3)McArdle Laboratory for Cancer Research, University of Wisconsin School of
Medicine and Public Health, Madison, WI, USA.
(4)Division of Pathology & Laboratory Medicine, Cincinnati Children's Hospital
Medical Center, Cincinnati, OH, USA.
(5)Viral Oncology, The Ohio State University Comprehensive Cancer Center,
Columbus, OH, USA.
(6)Pathology & Laboratory Medicine and Pulmonary Biology, Cincinnati Children's
Hospital Medical Center/University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, OH, USA.
(7)1] Cancer and Blood Diseases Institute, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical
Center, Cincinnati, OH, USA [2] Division of Hematology/Oncology, University
Hospital, University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, OH, USA.

Head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) is the sixth most common malignancy
worldwide, and patient outcomes using current treatments remain poor. Tumor
development is etiologically associated with tobacco or alcohol use and/or human 
papillomavirus (HPV) infection. HPV-positive HNSCCs, which frequently harbor
wild-type p53, carry a more favorable prognosis and are a biologically distinct
subgroup when compared with their HPV-negative counterparts. HPV E7 induces
expression of the human DEK gene, both in vitro and in vivo. In keratinocytes,
DEK overexpression is sufficient for causing oncogenic phenotypes in the absence 
of E7. Conversely, DEK loss results in cell death in HPV-positive cervical cancer
cells at least in part through p53 activation, and Dek knockout mice are
relatively resistant to the development of chemically induced skin papillomas.
Despite the established oncogenic role of DEK in HPV-associated cervical cancer
cell lines and keratinocytes, a functional role of DEK has not yet been explored 
in HNSCC. Using an established transgenic mouse model of HPV16 E7-induced HNSCC, 
we demonstrate that Dek is required for optimal proliferation of E7-transgenic
epidermal cells and for the growth of HNSCC tumors. Importantly, these studies
also demonstrate that DEK protein is universally upregulated in both HPV-positive
and -negative human HNSCC tumors relative to adjacent normal tissue. Furthermore,
DEK knockdown inhibited the proliferation of HPV-positive and -negative HNSCC
cells, establishing a functional role for DEK in human disease. Mechanistic
studies reveal that attenuated HNSCC cell growth in response to DEK loss was
associated with reduced expression of the oncogenic p53 family member, ﾎ年p63.
Exogenous ﾎ年p63 expression rescued the proliferative defect in the absence of
DEK, thereby establishing a functional DEK-ﾎ年p63 oncogenic pathway that promotes 
HNSCC. Taken together, our data demonstrate that DEK stimulates HNSCC cellular
growth and identify ﾎ年p63 as a novel DEK effector.

DOI: 10.1038/onc.2014.15 
PMCID: PMC4160430
PMID: 24608431  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
