

1553. Rev Neurol. 2013 Nov 16;57(10):451-4.

[Encephalitis due to the Epstein-Barr virus: a description of a clinical case and
review of the literature].

[Article in Spanish; Abstract available in Spanish from the publisher]

Barón J(1), Herrero-Velázquez S, Ruiz-Piñero M, Pedraza MI, Rojo-Rello S,
Guerrero-Peral ÁL.

Author information: 
(1)Hospital Clinico Universitario de Valladolid, 47005 Valladolid, Espana.

INTRODUCTION. Infection by the Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) -either as a primary
infection, a reactivation or an active chronic infection- can give rise to
several clinical forms of involvement of the central nervous system. We report a 
case of encephalitis due to EBV produced by viral reactivation in an
immunocompetent patient which initially mimicked, from the clinical and
electroencephalographic point of view, encephalitis due to type 1 herpes simplex 
virus (HSV-1). CASE REPORT. A 51-year-old male who had reported the presence of
dorsal herpes zoster some days earlier. The patient visited the emergency
department after suffering a holocranial oppressive headache and febricula for
seven days; 24 hours before admission to hospital, he was suffering from
drowsiness and language disorder. The neurological examination revealed stiffness
in the back of the neck and dysphasia. An analysis of the cerebrospinal fluid
revealed pleocytosis (422 cells/mm(3)) with 98% of mononuclear cells and normal
protein and glucose concentration levels in cerebrospinal fluid. Magnetic
resonance imaging of the brain and electroencephalogram readings were normal with
periodic lateralised epileptiform discharges in the left temporal region.
Intravenous acyclovir treatment was initiated, but renal failure meant it had to 
be changed to oral valaciclovir with clinical resolution and improvement of the
liquoral parameters. Polymerase chain reaction in the cerebrospinal fluid was
positive for EBV and negative for the other neurotropic viruses. In blood, the
serology test for EBV with IgG was positive, while IgM and heterophile antibody
tests were negative. CONCLUSIONS. EBV infection can give rise to acute
disseminated encephalomyelitis or affect several locations in the central nervous
system, especially the cerebellum. Clinical pictures mimicking HSV-1 are less
frequent. When encephalitis is related to viral reactivation, precipitating
factors can be detected, as in our case.

Publisher: Encefalitis por el virus de Epstein-Barr: descripcion de un caso
clinico y revision de la bibliografia.Introduccion. La infeccion por el virus de 
Epstein-Barr (VEB) puede dar lugar –tanto como primoinfeccion, reactivacion o
infeccion cronica activa– a varias formas clinicas de afectacion del sistema
nervioso central. Presentamos un caso de encefalitis por VEB producido por
reactivacion virica en un paciente inmunocompetente, que inicialmente simulaba,
desde el punto de vista clinico y electroencefalografico, una encefalitis por
virus herpes simple tipo 1 (VHS-1). Caso clinico. Varon de 51 años con
antecedente de herpes zoster dorsal en los dias previos. Acudio a urgencias por
un cuadro de siete dias de duracion de cefalea opresiva holocraneal y febricula; 
24 horas antes de su ingreso, padecia somnolencia y alteracion del lenguaje. En
la exploracion neurologica presentaba rigidez nucal y disfasia. En el liquido
cefalorraquideo se evidencio pleocitosis (422 celulas/mm3) con un 98% de
mononucleares, y proteinorraquia y glucorraquia normales. Resonancia magnetica
cerebral normal y electroencefalograma con descargas epileptiformes lateralizadas
periodicas en la region temporal izquierda. Se trato con aciclovir intravenoso;
una insuficiencia renal motivo su cambio a valaciclovir oral con resolucion
clinica y mejoria de los parametros licuorales. La reaccion en cadena de la
polimerasa en el liquido cefalorraquideo fue positiva para VEB y negativa para el
resto de virus neurotropos. En sangre, la serologia para VEB con IgG resulto
positiva, y negativa con IgM y anticuerpos heterofilos. Conclusiones. La
infeccion por VEB puede dar lugar a una encefalitis aguda diseminada o afectar a 
varias localizaciones del sistema nervioso central, principalmente el cerebelo.
Menos frecuentes son los cuadros imitadores de VHS-1. Cuando la encefalitis se
relaciona con reactivacion viral pueden detectarse, como en nuestro caso,
factores precipitantes.

PMID: 24203667  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
