

1576. Bull Cancer. 2010 Apr;97(4):475-82. doi: 10.1684/bdc.2010.1090.

[North African and Southeast Asian nasopharyngeal carcinomas: between the
resemblance and the dissemblance].

[Article in French]

Ayadi W(1), Khabir A, Hadhri-Guiga B, Fki L, Toumi N, Siala W, Charfi S, Fendri
A, Makni H, Boudawara T, Ghorbel A, Gargouri A, Jlidi R, Gargouri R, Busson P,
Drira M, Daoud J, Frikha M, Hammami A, Karray-Hakim H.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de microbiologie, CHU Habib-Bourguiba, 3029 Sfax, Tunisie.
zaidounemail@yahoo.fr

Nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC) is an unusual head and neck cancer because of its 
unequal geographical distribution and its consistent association with the
Epstein-Barr virus (EBV). This malignant tumor poses a serious public health
problem in many countries, especially in Southeast Asia and North Africa where
the recorded incidence are highest. During the past decade, a growing number of
studies were undertaken to define the molecular basis of NPC. However, the
analysis of several clinical and biological parameters of North African and
Southeast Asian NPCs has shown notable differences, suggesting that they could
result from a distinct combination of etiological factors. One intriguing
characteristic of North African NPC, concerns its bimodal age distribution with a
secondary peak of incidence in the range of 15-25 years, not observed in Asian
NPC. In this juvenile form of NPC, immuno-histochemistry assay has shown that the
two key proteins controlling the apoptotic-survival balance p53 and Bcl-2 are
less frequently expressed whereas the transmembrane tyrosine-kinase receptor
c-kit and the main EBV oncoprotein LMP1 were more abundant. In addition, the EBV 
serological alterations are less informative for the diagnosis of the juvenile
compared to the adult form. In addition, most North African NPCs contain EBV
strains with genetic polymorphisms distinct from those described in the Southeast
Asia series (predominance of F, D, H1-H2, XhoI+ and f, C, H, XhoI- respectively).
In contrast, studies relating on tumor chromosomal alterations or aberrant
promoter methylation result in data very similar to those obtained from the
Southeast Asia series, supporting the concept of a common molecular basis for all
NPC regardless of patient geographic origin.

DOI: 10.1684/bdc.2010.1090 
PMID: 20385521  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
