

1587. Anticancer Res. 2015 Jul;35(7):3801-10.

MMP9, Cyclin D1 and β-Catenin Are Useful Markers of p16-positive Squamous Cell
Carcinoma in Therapeutic EGFR Inhibition In Vitro.

Umbreit C(1), Erben P(2), Faber A(3), Hofheinz RD(4), Aderhold C(3), Weiss C(5), 
Hoermann K(3), Wenzel A(3), Schultz JD(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, University Medical
Centre Mannheim, Medical Faculty Mannheim, University of Heidelberg, Mannheim,
Germany claudia.umbreit@web.de.
(2)Department of Urology, University Medical Centre Mannheim, Medical Faculty
Mannheim, University of Heidelberg, Mannheim, Germany.
(3)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, University Medical
Centre Mannheim, Medical Faculty Mannheim, University of Heidelberg, Mannheim,
Germany.
(4)Department of Hematology and Oncology, University Medical Centre Mannheim,
Medical Faculty Mannheim, University of Heidelberg, Mannheim, Germany.
(5)Institute of Medical Statistics and Biometry, University Medical Centre
Mannheim, Medical Faculty Mannheim, University of Heidelberg, Mannheim, Germany.

BACKGROUND/AIM: In the United States 53,640 new cases of head and neck cancer
were estimated in 2013. Over 95% of these cases were evaluated as squamous cell
carcinoma (SCC). At present, smoking, drinking alcohol, chewing betel and
infection with high-risk types of human papilloma virus (HPV) are classified as
risk factors of oropharyngeal squamous cancer cell carcinoma (OPSCC). It could be
suggested that patients with HPV-positive OPSCC have a better response to
chemoradiotherapy than patients without. In many studies, there was observed an
inverse correlation between epithelial growth factor receptor (EGFR) expression
and HPV status in p16-positive SCC. Therefore, it is of great clinical interest
to specify the phenotype of cancer cells in order to further individualize
treatment modalities. The aim of the study was to investigate the expression
pattern of specific markers in p16-positive SCC cells after stimulation with
lapatinib and gefitinib.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We incubated p16-positive CERV196 cells with lapatinib and
gefitinib (2 μg/ml) and after 5, 24 and 96 h determined E-cadherin, vimentin,
matrix metalloproteinase-9 (MMP9), cyclin D1 and β-catenin by
immunocytochemistry, enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay and quantitative
polymerase chain reaction (PCR).
RESULTS: We found an increase of E-cadherin and a decrease of vimentin in
unstimulated cells. We detected an alteration of expression of vimentin and
E-cadherin level after treatment with lapatinib and gefitinib. We demonstrated a 
statistically significant lapatinib- and gefitinib-induced repression of cyclin
D1, MMP9 and β-catenin in CERV196 cells dependent on incubation time.
CONCLUSION: Cyclin D1 and MMP9 expression profiles may represent an early measure
of sensitivity and level of response to lapatinib and gefitinib. The presented
cell culture model is, therefore, well-suited for further study of epigenetic
regulation of molecular targeted-therapy by EGFR inhibition and prevention of
mesenchymal transition in p16-positive SCC cells.

Copyright© 2015 International Institute of Anticancer Research (Dr. John G.
Delinassios), All rights reserved.


PMID: 26124325  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
