

16. Ann Oncol. 2017 Oct 1;28(10):2386-2398. doi: 10.1093/annonc/mdx304.

Human papillomavirus-related oropharyngeal cancer.

Taberna M(1)(2)(3), Mena M(2)(4), Pavón MA(2), Alemany L(2)(5), Gillison ML(6),
Mesía R(1)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology.
(2)Cancer Epidemiology Research Program, IDIBELL, Catalan Institute of Oncology
(ICO), L'Hospitalet de Llobregat, Barcelona.
(3)Department of Medicine, University of Barcelona, Barcelona.
(4)CIBER in primary and secondary prevention of viral induced cancers (CIBERONC),
Madrid, Spain.
(5)Epidemiology and Public Health, Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red:
Epidemiología y Salud Pública (CIBERESP), Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Madrid, 
Spain.
(6)Department of Medicine, The Ohio State University, Columbus, USA.

High-risk human papillomavirus (HPV) is now recognised as the principal cause of 
the increasing incidence rates of oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma (OPSCC)
in some parts of the world. The primary risk factor for developing HPV-related
OPSCC is oral HPV-infection and the majority of oral HPV-infections are acquired 
by oral sex. Progression into an OPSCC includes persistent infection with evasion
of immune response in the microenvironment, the activation of viral early genes
(E6, E7) in basal epithelial cells, the deregulation of cell cycle and the
accumulation of chromosomal instability. Patients affected by HPV-related OPSCC
tend to be younger and have better outcomes. This observation has lead current
research to evaluate treatment de-escalation options to reduce long-term
associated morbidity. Moreover, a different molecular profile for HPV-related
OPSCC has been described, opening new options for targeted therapy and
immunotherapy approaches. This paper comprehensively reviews our accumulated
knowledge regarding the role of HPV in OPSCC spanning from infection to cancer
development, including its clinical diagnosis, management and preventive
strategies.

© The Author 2017. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the European
Society for Medical Oncology. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please email:
journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/annonc/mdx304 
PMID: 28633362  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
