

1609. MBio. 2016 May 3;7(3). pii: e00270-16. doi: 10.1128/mBio.00270-16.

Suppression of Antitumor Immune Responses by Human Papillomavirus through
Epigenetic Downregulation of CXCL14.

Cicchini L(1), Westrich JA(1), Xu T(1), Vermeer DW(2), Berger JN(1), Clambey
ET(3), Lee D(4), Song JI(5), Lambert PF(4), Greer RO(6), Lee JH(7), Pyeon D(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Microbiology, University of Colorado School of
Medicine, Aurora, Colorado, USA.
(2)Cancer Biology Research Center, Sanford Research, Sioux Falls, South Dakota,
USA.
(3)Department of Anesthesiology, University of Colorado School of Medicine,
Aurora, Colorado, USA.
(4)McArdle Laboratory for Cancer Research, University of Wisconsin-Madison,
Madison, Wisconsin, USA.
(5)Department of Otolaryngology, University of Colorado School of Medicine,
Aurora, Colorado, USA.
(6)Departments of Pathology and Dermatology and Division of Oral and
Maxillofacial Pathology, University of Colorado School of Medicine, Aurora,
Colorado, USA.
(7)Cancer Biology Research Center, Sanford Research, Sioux Falls, South Dakota,
USA john.lee@sanfordhealth.org dohun.pyeon@ucdenver.edu.
(8)Department of Immunology and Microbiology, University of Colorado School of
Medicine, Aurora, Colorado, USA Department of Medicine, University of Colorado
School of Medicine, Aurora, Colorado, USA john.lee@sanfordhealth.org
dohun.pyeon@ucdenver.edu.

High-risk human papillomaviruses (HPVs) are causally associated with multiple
human cancers. Previous studies have shown that the HPV oncoprotein E7 induces
immune suppression; however, the underlying mechanisms remain unknown. To
understand the mechanisms by which HPV deregulates host immune responses in the
tumor microenvironment, we analyzed gene expression changes of all known
chemokines and their receptors using our global gene expression data sets from
human HPV-positive and -negative head/neck cancer and cervical tissue specimens
in different disease stages. We report that, while many proinflammatory
chemokines increase expression throughout cancer progression, CXCL14 is
dramatically downregulated in HPV-positive cancers. HPV suppression of CXCL14 is 
dependent on E7 and associated with DNA hypermethylation in the CXCL14 promoter. 
Using in vivo mouse models, we revealed that restoration of Cxcl14 expression in 
HPV-positive mouse oropharyngeal carcinoma cells clears tumors in immunocompetent
syngeneic mice, but not in Rag1-deficient mice. Further, Cxcl14 reexpression
significantly increases natural killer (NK), CD4(+) T, and CD8(+) T cell
infiltration into the tumor-draining lymph nodes in vivo In vitro transwell
migration assays show that Cxcl14 reexpression induces chemotaxis of NK, CD4(+)
T, and CD8(+) T cells. These results suggest that CXCL14 downregulation by HPV
plays an important role in suppression of antitumor immune responses. Our
findings provide a new mechanistic understanding of virus-induced immune evasion 
that contributes to cancer progression.IMPORTANCE: Human papillomaviruses (HPVs) 
are causally associated with more than 5% of all human cancers. During decades of
cancer progression, HPV persists, evading host surveillance. However, little is
known about the immune evasion mechanisms driven by HPV. Here we report that the 
chemokine CXCL14 is significantly downregulated in HPV-positive head/neck and
cervical cancers. Using patient tissue specimens and cultured keratinocytes, we
found that CXCL14 downregulation is linked to CXCL14 promoter hypermethylation
induced by the HPV oncoprotein E7. Restoration of Cxcl14 expression in
HPV-positive cancer cells clears tumors in immunocompetent syngeneic mice, but
not in immunodeficient mice. Mice with Cxcl14 reexpression show dramatically
increased natural killer and T cells in the tumor-draining lymph nodes. These
results suggest that epigenetic downregulation of CXCL14 by HPV plays an
important role in suppressing antitumor immune responses. Our findings may offer 
novel insights to develop preventive and therapeutic tools for restoring
antitumor immune responses in HPV-infected individuals.

Copyright © 2016 Cicchini et al.

DOI: 10.1128/mBio.00270-16 
PMCID: PMC4959654
PMID: 27143385  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
