

1611. Folia Biol (Praha). 2016;62(3):110-9.

Importance of Tumour Suppressor Gene Methylation in Sinonasal Carcinomas.

Chmelařová M(1), Sirák I(2), Mžik M(1), Sieglová K(3), Vošmiková H(3), Dundr
P(4), Němejcová K(4), Michálek J(5), Vošmik M(2), Palička V(1), Laco J(3).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Clinical Biochemistry and Diagnostics, Charles University in
Prague - Faculty of Medicine in Hradec Králové and University Hospital in Hradec 
Králové, Czech Republic.
(2)Department of Oncology and Radiotherapy, Charles University in Prague -
Faculty of Medicine in Hradec Králové and University Hospital in Hradec Králové, 
Czech Republic.
(3)The Fingerland Department of Pathology, Charles University in Prague - Faculty
of Medicine in Hradec Králové and University Hospital in Hradec Králové, Czech
Republic.
(4)Institute of Pathology, First Faculty of Medicine, Charles University in
Prague and General University Hospital in Prague, Czech Republic.
(5)Department of Clinical and Molecular Pathology, Palacký University Olomouc,
Faculty of Medicine and Dentistry and University Hospital Olomouc, Czech
Republic.

Epigenetic changes are considered to be a frequent event during tumour
development. Hypermethylation of promoter CpG islands represents an alternative
mechanism for inactivation of tumour suppressor genes, DNA repair genes, cell
cycle regulators and transcription factors. The aim of this study was to
investigate promoter methylation of specific genes in samples of sinonasal
carcinoma by comparison with normal sinonasal tissue. To search for epigenetic
events we used methylation-specific multiplex ligation-dependent probe
amplification (MS-MLPA) to compare the methylation status of 64 tissue samples of
sinonasal carcinomas with 19 control samples. We also compared the human
papilloma virus (HPV) status with DNA methylation. Using a 20% cut-off for
methylation, we observed significantly higher methylation in RASSF1, CDH13, ESR1 
and TP73 genes in the sinonasal cancer group compared with the control group. HPV
positivity was found in 15/64 (23.4 %) of all samples in the carcinoma group and 
in no sample in the control group. No correlation was found between DNA
methylation and HPV status. In conclusion, our study showed that there are
significant differences in promoter methylation in the RASSF1, ESR 1, TP73 and
CDH13 genes between sinonasal carcinoma and normal sinonasal tissue, suggesting
the importance of epigenetic changes in these genes in carcinogenesis of the
sinonasal area. These findings could be used as prognostic factors and may have
implications for future individualised therapies based on epigenetic changes.


PMID: 27516190  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
