

1621. Zhonghua Er Bi Yan Hou Tou Jing Wai Ke Za Zhi. 2010 May;45(5):414-9.

[Enhanced thymidine kinase gene vector and its killing effect on nasopharyngeal
carcinoma in vitro and in vivo].

[Article in Chinese]

Shen CX(1), Wen Z, Qian YH, Guan XF, Mu SF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology Head and Neck Surgery, Pearl River Hospital,
NanFang Medical University, Guangzhou, China.

OBJECTIVE: To construct a modified and enhanced thymidine kinase (TK) vector
regulated by human telomerase catalytic subunit promoter (hTERT) promoter and
cytomegalovirus (CMV) enhancer and its killing effect on nasopharyngeal carcinoma
in vitro and in vivo and its safety in vivo.
METHODS: The pGL3-basic, as basic vector template, was linked and constructed
into TK vector regulated by hTERT promoter and CMV enhancer with mono-promoter
vector as control. Enhanced TK expression was confirmed by fluorescent microscopy
and real time fluorescent quantitative PCR. Telomerase activity was measured by
stretch PCR. Tumour killing effects were examined by MTT and Boyden areola. The
effects of enhanced TK on the invasiveness of tumor cell NPC 5-8F and the growth 
of xenograft implanted in nude mice were investigated.
RESULTS: Compared with non-enhanced vector, TK expressed by the enhanced vector
significantly increased in NPC 5-8F and MCF-7 cells, telomerase activity was
positive in human in NPC 5-8F cells and breast cancer MCF-7 cells and negative in
control human blood vessel endothelium ECV-304 cells. After ganciclovir(GCV)
treatment, NPC 5-8F cell survival rate and invasiveness decreased and tumor
progress of NPC xenograft implanted in nude mice was inhibited, without obvious
toxicity effects on mouse liver and kidney.
CONCLUSIONS: The enhanced TK vector regulated by hTERT promoter and CMV enhancer 
can obviously and specifically inhibit and kill nasopharyngeal carcinoma cells in
culture and nasopharyngeal carcinoma xenograft in nude mice in vivo, without
obviously toxic side effects on nude mice. The targeted and enhanced TK gene
vector with high performance may be a new tumour targeted gene therapy strategy
clinically to aim directly at most malignant tumours including nasopharyngeal
carcinoma, with more extensive anti-cancer spectrum.


PMID: 20654181  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
