
Conflict of interest statement: statement All authors declared no conflicts of
interest.


1659. J Biol Regul Homeost Agents. 2018 Jan-Feb;32(2 Suppl. 1):73-79.

HPV acting on E-cadherin, p53 and p16: literature review.

Ottria L(#)(1), Candotto V(#)(2), Cura F(3), Baggi L(4), Arcuri C(4), Nardone
M(5), Gaudio RM(3), Gatto R(6), Spadari F(7), Carinci F(8).

Author information: 
(1)Dental School, Tor Vergata University, Rome, Italy.
(2)Department of Biomedical, Surgical and Dental Sciences, University of Milan,
Milan, Italy.
(3)Department of Medical Sciences, University of Ferrara, Ferrara, Italy.
(4)Department of Clinical Sciences and Translational Medicine, University of Tor 
Vergata, Rome, Italy.
(5)Ministry of Health, Rome, Italy.
(6)Department of Life, Health and Environmental Sciences, School of Dentistry,
University of L’Aquila, L’Aquila, Italy.
(7)Department of Medicine and Surgery, University of Milano Bicocca, Monza,
Italy.
(8)Department of Morphology, Surgery and Experimental Medicine, University of
Ferrara, Ferrara, Italy.
(#)Contributed equally

In addition to tobacco and alcohol consumption, the two main risk factors for
oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC), recent studies have revealed infections with
human papilloma virus (HPV) as an additional risk factor for OSCC development. In
the field of head and neck malignancies, the prevalence of HPV infections in
oropharyngeal cancer (OC) ranges in different studies up to 84%. While HPV
infection is discussed as an independent risk factor in this region, its
distinguished role in carcinogenesis of tumours localized to the oral cavity
remains uncertain. A systematic literature search was performed using PubMed,
Cochrane library, Science Direct, and the Internet search, with language
restricted to English. The search included published studies which dealt with
detection methods of HPV-related oral and oropharyngeal cancers and biomolecular 
studies, particularly regarding the compromising of p53 p16 and e-cadherin’s. P53
Tumour suppressor protein p53 has several functions that are related to
maintaining genomic stability and inhibiting cell proliferation in response to
DNA damage. For preventing neoplasia to occur, the most important of these
functions are cessation of cell growth and induction of either apoptosis or
senescence. P16 is a cellular protein involved in cell cycle regulation. It is a 
cyclin-dependent kinase 4 (CDK4) inhibitor, and is integral to Rb mediated
regulation of G1-S phase of the cell cycle. P16 is expressed at a very low level 
in normal cell as Rb inhibits transcription of p16. Various detection methods
ranging from immunohistochemistry (IHC) to molecular techniques have been used to
determine the HPV status of HNSCC. E-cadherin, a 120 kDa Type I classical
cadherin, is expressed primarily on epithelial cells. It is found on the surface 
of keratinocytesand Langerhans cells (LC) and E-cadherin mediated adhesion
between these cell types is required for LC retention in the epidermis. It is
also an important tumour suppressor protein: its loss or inactivation is
associated with epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT), a process involving
dedifferentiation, infiltration and metastasis of tumours. Oral carcinogenesis is
a multi-factorial process involving socioeconomic, environmental and microbial
factors leading to multistep changes. Smoking and tobacco exposure seems to
modify the survival and recurrence of HPV positive tumours and should be
considered in future trials for risk stratification of HPV positive patients. HPV
associated oropharynx cancer represents a distinct clinical and biologic entity
with many unresolved issues that will be investigated in future translational,
clinical research. We need to further explore and understand why the disease
occurs predominantly in males, and whether the natural history of oral HPV
infection differences in men and women.


PMID: 29460521  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
