

1665. BMC Cancer. 2011 Feb 3;11:54. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-11-54.

Synergistic antitumor effect of AAV-mediated TRAIL expression combined with
cisplatin on head and neck squamous cell carcinoma.

Jiang M(1), Liu Z, Xiang Y, Ma H, Liu S, Liu Y, Zheng D.

Author information: 
(1)National Key Laboratory of Medical Molecular Biology, Institute of Basic
Medical Sciences, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences & Peking Union Medical
College, Beijing 100005, China.

BACKGROUND: Adeno-associated virus-2 (AAV-2)-mediated gene therapy is quite
suitable for local or regional application in head and neck cancer squamous cell 
carcinoma (HNSCC). However, its low transduction efficiency has limited its
further development as a therapeutic agent. DNA damaging agents have been shown
to enhance AAV-mediated transgene expression. Cisplatin, one of the most
effective chemotherapeutic agents, has been recognized to cause cancer cell death
by apoptosis with a severe toxicity. This study aims to evaluate the role of
cisplatin in AAV-mediated tumor necrosis factor-related apoptosis-inducing ligand
(TRAIL) expression and the effect on HNSCC both in vitro and in vivo.
METHODS: Five human HNSCC cell lines were treated with recombinant soluble TRAIL 
(rsTRAIL) and infected with AAV/TRAIL to estimate the sensitivity of the cancer
cells to TRAIL-induced cytotoxicity. KB cells were infected with AAV/EGFP with or
without cisplatin pretreatment to evaluate the effect of cisplatin on
AAV-mediated gene expression. TRAIL expression was detected by ELISA and Western 
blot. Cytotoxicity was measured by MTT assay and Western blot analysis for
caspase-3 and -8 activations. Following the in vitro experiments, TRAIL
expression and its tumoricidal activity were analyzed in nude mice with
subcutaneous xenografts of HNSCC.
RESULTS: HNSCC cell lines showed different sensitivities to rsTRAIL, and KB cells
possessed both highest transduction efficacy of AAV and sensitivity to TRAIL
among five cell lines. Preincubation of KB cells with subtherapeutic dosage of
cisplatin significantly augmented AAV-mediated transgene expression in a heparin 
sulfate proteoglycan (HSPG)-dependent manner. Furthermore, cisplatin enhanced the
killing efficacy of AAV/TRAIL by 3-fold on KB cell line. The AAV mediated TRAIL
expression was observed in the xenografted tumors and significantly enhanced by
cisplatin. AAV/TRAIL suppressed the tumors growth and cisplatin augmented the
tumoricidal activity by two-fold. Furthermore, Combination treatment reduced
cisplatin-caused body weight loss in nude mice.
CONCLUSION: The combination of AAV-mediated TRAIL gene expression and cisplatin
had synergistic therapeutic effects on head and neck cancers and reduced the
potential toxicity of cisplatin. These findings suggest that the combination of
AAV/TRAIL and cisplatin may be a promising strategy for HNSCC therapy.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2407-11-54 
PMCID: PMC3044652
PMID: 21291526  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
