

1682. Virol J. 2017 Jan 11;14(1):4. doi: 10.1186/s12985-016-0678-0.

Acute flaccid myelitis associated with enterovirus-D68 infection in an otherwise 
healthy child.

Esposito S(1), Chidini G(2), Cinnante C(3), Napolitano L(2), Giannini A(2),
Terranova L(4), Niesters H(5), Principi N(4), Calderini E(2).

Author information: 
(1)Pediatric Highly Intensive Care Unit, Department of Pathophysiology and
Transplantation, Università degli Studi di Milano, Fondazione IRCCS Ca' Granda
Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Via Commenda 9, 20122, Milano, Italy.
susanna.esposito@unimi.it.
(2)Pediatric Intensive Care Unit, Fondazione IRCCS Ca' Granda Ospedale Maggiore
Policlinico, Milan, Italy.
(3)Neuroadiology Unit, Department of Pathophysiology and Transplantation,
Università degli Studi di Milano, Fondazione IRCCS Ca' Granda Ospedale Maggiore
Policlinico, Milan, Italy.
(4)Pediatric Highly Intensive Care Unit, Department of Pathophysiology and
Transplantation, Università degli Studi di Milano, Fondazione IRCCS Ca' Granda
Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Via Commenda 9, 20122, Milano, Italy.
(5)Department of Medical Microbiology, Division of Clinical Virology, University 
Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: Reporting new cases of enterovirus (EV)-D68-associated acute flaccid 
myelitis (AFM) is essential to understand how the virus causes neurological
damage and to characterize EV-D68 strains associated with AFM.
CASE PRESENTATION: A previously healthy 4-year-old boy presented with sudden
weakness and limited mobility in his left arm. Two days earlier, he had an upper 
respiratory illness with mild fever. At admission, his physical examination
showed that the child was febrile (38.5 °C) and alert but had a stiff neck and
weakness in his left arm, which was hypotonic and areflexic. Cerebrospinal fluid 
(CSF) examination showed a mild increase in white blood cell count (80/mm3, 41%
neutrophils) and a slightly elevated protein concentration (76 gm/dL). Bacterial 
culture and molecular biology tests for detecting viral infection in CSF were
negative. The patient was then treated with intravenous ceftriaxone and
acyclovir. Despite therapy, within 24 h, the muscle weakness extended to all four
limbs, which exhibited greatly reduced mobility. Due to his worsening clinical
prognosis, the child was transferred to our Pediatric Intensive Care Unit; at
admission he was diagnosed with acute flaccid paralysis of all four limbs. Brain 
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was negative, except for a focal signal
alteration in the dorsal portion of the medulla oblongata, also involving the
pontine tegmentum, whereas spine MRI showed an extensive signal alteration of the
cervical and dorsal spinal cord reported as myelitis. Signal alteration was
mainly localized in the central grey matter, most likely in the anterior horns.
Molecular biology tests performed on nasopharyngeal aspirate and on
bronchoalveolar lavage fluid were negative for bacteria but positive for EV-D68
clade B3. Plasmapheresis was performed and corticosteroids and intravenous
immunoglobulins were administered. After 4 weeks of treatment, the signs and
symptoms of AFM were significantly reduced, although some weakness and tingling
remained in the patient's four limbs. MRI acquired after 3 weeks showed that the 
previously reported alterations were no longer present.
CONCLUSION: This case suggests that EV-D68 is a neurotropic agent that can cause 
AFM and strains are circulating in Europe. EV-D68 disease surveillance is
required to better understand EV-D68 pathology and to compare various strains
that cause AFM.

DOI: 10.1186/s12985-016-0678-0 
PMCID: PMC5234096
PMID: 28081720  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
