

1697. Eur J Cancer. 2016 Apr;57:78-86. doi: 10.1016/j.ejca.2016.01.003. Epub 2016 Feb
18.

Targeted next-generation sequencing of locally advanced squamous cell carcinomas 
of the head and neck reveals druggable targets for improving adjuvant
chemoradiation.

Tinhofer I(1), Budach V(2), Saki M(2), Konschak R(2), Niehr F(2), Jöhrens K(3),
Weichert W(4), Linge A(5), Lohaus F(5), Krause M(6), Neumann K(7), Endris V(8),
Sak A(9), Stuschke M(9), Balermpas P(10), Rödel C(10), Avlar M(11), Grosu AL(11),
Abdollahi A(12), Debus J(12), Belka C(13), Pigorsch S(14), Combs SE(15), Mönnich 
D(16), Zips D(16), Baumann M(6); DKTK-ROG.

Author information: 
(1)German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany and German Cancer
Consortium (DKTK) partner sites, Berlin, Germany; Department of Radiooncology and
Radiotherapy, Charité University Hospital Berlin, Germany. Electronic address:
ingeborg.tinhofer@charite.de.
(2)German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany and German Cancer
Consortium (DKTK) partner sites, Berlin, Germany; Department of Radiooncology and
Radiotherapy, Charité University Hospital Berlin, Germany.
(3)Institute of Pathology, Charité-University Hospital Berlin, Germany.
(4)German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany and German Cancer
Consortium (DKTK) partner sites, Munich, Germany; Institute of Pathology,
University Hospital Heidelberg and National Center for Tumor Disease, Germany;
Institute of Pathology, Technical University Munich, Germany.
(5)German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany and German Cancer
Consortium (DKTK) partner sites, Dresden, Germany; Department of Radiation
Oncology, Faculty of Medicine and University Hospital Carl Gustav Carus,
Technische Universität Dresden, Germany; OncoRay - National Center for Radiation 
Research in Oncology (NCRO), Faculty of Medicine and University Hospital Carl
Gustav Carus, Technische Universität Dresden, Germany.
(6)German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany and German Cancer
Consortium (DKTK) partner sites, Dresden, Germany; Department of Radiation
Oncology, Faculty of Medicine and University Hospital Carl Gustav Carus,
Technische Universität Dresden, Germany; OncoRay - National Center for Radiation 
Research in Oncology (NCRO), Faculty of Medicine and University Hospital Carl
Gustav Carus, Technische Universität Dresden, Germany; Helmholtz-Zentrum Dresden,
Rossendorf, Dresden, Germany.
(7)Institute of Biometry and Clinical Epidemiology, Charité University Hospital
Berlin, Germany.
(8)German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany and German Cancer
Consortium (DKTK) partner sites, Munich, Germany; Institute of Pathology,
University Hospital Heidelberg and National Center for Tumor Disease, Germany.
(9)German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany and German Cancer
Consortium (DKTK) partner sites, Essen, Germany; Department of Radiotherapy,
Medical Faculty, University of Duisburg-Essen, Essen, Germany.
(10)German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany and German Cancer
Consortium (DKTK) partner sites, Frankfurt, Germany; Department of Radiotherapy
and Oncology, Goethe-University Frankfurt, Germany.
(11)German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany and German Cancer
Consortium (DKTK) partner sites, Freiburg, Germany; Department of Radiation
Oncology, University of Freiburg, Germany.
(12)German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany and German Cancer
Consortium (DKTK) partner sites, Heidelberg, Germany; Department of Radiation
Oncology, Heidelberg Ion Therapy Center (HIT), Heidelberg Institute of Radiation 
Oncology (HIRO) and National Center for Radiation Research in Oncology (NCRO),
Germany.
(13)German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany and German Cancer
Consortium (DKTK) partner sites, Munich, Germany; Department of Radiotherapy and 
Radiation Oncology, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität, Munich, Germany.
(14)German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany and German Cancer
Consortium (DKTK) partner sites, Munich, Germany; Department of Radiation
Oncology, Technical University Munich, Germany.
(15)German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany and German Cancer
Consortium (DKTK) partner sites, Munich, Germany; Department of Radiation
Oncology, Technical University Munich, Germany; Institute of Innovative
Radiotherapy, Helmholtz Center Munich, Germany.
(16)German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany and German Cancer
Consortium (DKTK) partner sites, Tübingen; Germany; Department of Radiation
Oncology, Faculty of Medicine and University Hospital Tübingen, Eberhard Karls
Universität Tübingen, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Despite clear differences in clinical presentation and outcome,
squamous cell carcinomas of the head and neck (SCCHN) arising from human
papilloma virus (HPV) infection or heavy tobacco/alcohol consumption are treated 
equally. Next-generation sequencing is expected to reveal novel targets for more 
individualised treatment.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Tumour specimens from 208 patients with locally advanced
squamous cell carcinoma of the hypopharynx, oropharynx or oral cavity, all
uniformly treated with adjuvant cisplatin-based chemoradiation, were included. A 
customised panel covering 211 exons from 45 genes frequently altered in SCCHN was
used for detection of non-synonymous point and frameshift mutations. Mutations
were correlated with HPV status and treatment outcome.
RESULTS: Mutational profiles and HPV status were successfully established for 179
cases. HPV- tumours showed an increased frequency of alterations in tumour
suppressor genes compared to HPV+ cases (TP53 67% versus 4%, CDKN2A 18% versus
0%). Conversely, HPV+ carcinomas were enriched for activating mutations in driver
genes compared to HPV- cases (PIK3CA 30% versus 12%, KRAS 6% versus 1%, and NRAS 
4% versus 0%). Hotspot TP53 missense mutations in HPV- carcinomas correlated with
an increased risk of locoregional recurrence (hazard ratio [HR] 4.3, 95%
confidence interval [CI] 1.5-12.1, P=0.006) and death (HR 2.2, 95% CI 1.1-4.4,
P=0.021). In HPV+ SCCHN, driver gene mutations were associated per trend with a
higher risk of death (HR 3.9, 95% CI 0.7-21.1, P=0.11).
CONCLUSIONS: Distinct mutation profiles in HPV- and HPV+ SCCHN identify subgroups
with poor outcome after adjuvant chemoradiation. Mutant p53 and the
phosphoinositide 3-kinase pathway were identified as potential druggable targets 
for subgroup-specific treatment optimisation.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejca.2016.01.003 
PMID: 26896955  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
