

1733. Int J Pediatr Otorhinolaryngol. 2014 Oct;78(10):1655-61. doi:
10.1016/j.ijporl.2014.07.015. Epub 2014 Jul 21.

Respiratory viruses are continuously detected in children with chronic
tonsillitis throughout the year.

Proença-Módena JL(1), Buzatto GP(2), Paula FE(3), Saturno TH(4), Delcaro LS(5),
Prates MC(4), Tamashiro E(2), Valera FC(2), Arruda E(3), Anselmo-Lima WT(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, School of Medicine of Ribeirão Preto of University
of São Paulo, Ribeirão Preto, Brazil; Virology Research Center, School of
Medicine of Ribeirão Preto of University of São Paulo, Ribeirão Preto, Brazil;
Department of Genetics, Evolution and Bioagents, Institute of Biology, University
of Campinas (UNICAMP), Campinas, SP, Brazil.
(2)Department of Ophthalmology, Otorhinolaryngology and Head and Neck Surgery,
School of Medicine of Ribeirao Preto of University of São Paulo, Ribeirao Preto, 
Brazil.
(3)Department of Cell Biology, School of Medicine of Ribeirão Preto of University
of São Paulo, Ribeirão Preto, Brazil; Virology Research Center, School of
Medicine of Ribeirão Preto of University of São Paulo, Ribeirão Preto, Brazil.
(4)Virology Research Center, School of Medicine of Ribeirão Preto of University
of São Paulo, Ribeirão Preto, Brazil; Department of Ophthalmology,
Otorhinolaryngology and Head and Neck Surgery, School of Medicine of Ribeirao
Preto of University of São Paulo, Ribeirao Preto, Brazil.
(5)Department of Internal Medicine, School of Medicine of Ribeirão Preto of
University of São Paulo, Ribeirão Preto, Brazil.
(6)Department of Ophthalmology, Otorhinolaryngology and Head and Neck Surgery,
School of Medicine of Ribeirao Preto of University of São Paulo, Ribeirao Preto, 
Brazil. Electronic address: wtalima@fmrp.usp.br.

OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the oscillations on the viral detection in adenotonsillar 
tissues from patients with chronic adenotonsillar diseases as an indicia of the
presence of persistent viral infections or acute subclinical infections.
STUDY DESIGN: Cross-sectional prospective study.
SETTING: Tertiary hospital.
METHODS: The fluctuations of respiratory virus detection were compared to the
major climatic variables during a two-year period using adenoids and palatine
tonsils from 172 children with adenotonsillar hypertrophy and clinical evidence
of obstructive sleep apnoea syndrome or recurrent adenotonsillitis, without
symptoms of acute respiratory infection (ARI), by TaqMan real-time PCR.
RESULTS: The rate of detection of at least one respiratory virus in
adenotonsillar tissue was 87%. The most frequently detected viruses were human
adenovirus in 52.8%, human enterovirus in 47.2%, human rhinovirus in 33.8%, human
bocavirus in 31.1%, human metapneumovirus in 18.3% and human respiratory
syncytial virus in 17.2%. Although increased detection of human enterovirus
occurred in summer/autumn months, and there were summer nadirs of human
respiratory syncytial virus in both years of the study, there was no obvious
viral seasonality in contrast to reports with ARI patients in many regions of the
world.
CONCLUSION: Respiratory viruses are continuously highly detected during whole
year, and without any clinical symptomatology, indicating that viral genome of
some virus can persist in lymphoepithelial tissues of the upper respiratory
tract.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijporl.2014.07.015 
PMID: 25128448  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
