

1762. Anticancer Res. 2013 Dec;33(12):5385-93.

Small molecule-based chemotherapeutic approach in p16-positive and -negative
HNSCC in vitro.

Aderhold C(1), Faber A, Grobschmidt GM, Chakraborty A, Bockmayer A, Umbreit C,
Birk R, Stern-Straeter J, Hörmann K, Schultz JD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology Head and Neck Surgery, University Hospital
Mannheim, Theodor-Kutzer-Ufer 1-3, 68167 Mannheim, Germany.
christoph.aderhold@umm.de.

BACKGROUND: Incidence of oropharyngeal head and neck squamous cell carcinoma
(HNSCC) induced by the human papilloma virus (HPV) is rising. HNSCC is the sixth 
most common neoplasia worldwide. The survival rate remains poor, thus innovative 
therapy approaches are necessary. Everolimus, an inhibitor of the mammalian
target of rapamycin, as well as the multi-tyrosine kinase inhibitors sorafenib
(targeting vascular endothelial growth factor receptor, platelet-derived growth
factor receptor and RAF) and sunitinib (targeting vascular endothelial growth
factor receptor, platelet-derived growth factor receptor, stem cell factor
receptor, RET proto-oncogene and colony-stimulating factor), have shown a
remarkable antitumor effect against various tumor entities, with moderate
side-effects. These drugs are administered orally, which should lead to higher
patient compliance and less hospitalisation.
AIM: This study sought to evaluate the expression of PDGFR α/β and
hypoxia-inducible factor-1α (HIF-1α) and their alterations induced by everolimus,
sorafenib and sunitinib in chemonaïve HPV-positive and HPV-negative HNSCC. To our
knowledge, this is the first in vitro study to investigate such cases.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We incubated HPV-positive CERV196 and HPV-negative HNSCC
11A and 14C cells for 2 to 8 days with increasing concentration of drugs.
Expression of PDGFR α/β and HIF-1α was measured by enzyme-linked immunosorbent
assay and compared to a chemonaïve controls.
RESULTS: Our study showed that PDGFR α/β and HIF-1α were expressed in all three
cell lines. Incubation with everolimus, sorafenib or sunitinib led to a decrease 
in PDGFR α/β and HIF-1α expression, depending on the HPV status. A statistically 
significant alteration of PDGFR α/β was detected in CERV196 only. Thus,
HPV-positive HNSCC exhibited a higher sensitivity to the drugs used compared to
HPV-negative HNSCC 11A and 14C tumor cells. A significant reduction of HIF-1α was
measured for HNSCC 11A and 14C only. An escalation of drug concentration had no
significant effect.
CONCLUSION: We showed that these novel agents led to a significant reduction of
PDGFR and HIF-1α, depending on the HPV status. HPV positivity is associated with 
increased chemosensitivity and may be associated with better locoregional control
and overall patient survival compared to HPV negativity. Further studies are
necessary to investigate the efficacy and safety of these agents in the treatment
of HPV-positive and -negative HNSCC in vivo.


PMID: 24324073  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
