

1776. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2016 Apr 1;94(5):1198-206. doi:
10.1016/j.ijrobp.2016.01.005. Epub 2016 Jan 14.

Radiation-Induced Dedifferentiation of Head and Neck Cancer Cells Into Cancer
Stem Cells Depends on Human Papillomavirus Status.

Vlashi E(1), Chen AM(2), Boyrie S(2), Yu G(2), Nguyen A(2), Brower PA(2), Hess
CB(3), Pajonk F(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA, Los
Angeles, California; Jonsson Comprehensive Cancer Center at UCLA, Los Angeles,
California. Electronic address: evlashi@mednet.ucla.edu.
(2)Department of Radiation Oncology, David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA, Los
Angeles, California.
(3)Department of Radiation Oncology, University of California Davis, Sacramento, 
California.
(4)Department of Radiation Oncology, David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA, Los
Angeles, California; Jonsson Comprehensive Cancer Center at UCLA, Los Angeles,
California.

PURPOSE: To test the hypothesis that the radiation response of cancer stem cells 
(CSCs) in human papillomavirus (HPV)-positive and HPV-negative head and neck
squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) differs and is not reflected in the radiation
response of the bulk tumor populations, that radiation therapy (RT) can
dedifferentiate non-stem HNSCC cells into CSCs, and that radiation-induced
dedifferentiation depends on the HPV status.
METHODS AND MATERIALS: Records of a cohort of 162 HNSCC patients were reviewed,
and their outcomes were correlated with their HPV status. Using a panel of
HPV-positive and HPV-negative HNSCC cell lines expressing a reporter for CSCs, we
characterized HPV-positive and HPV-negative lines via flow cytometry,
sphere-forming capacity assays in vitro, and limiting dilution assays in vivo.
Non-CSCs were treated with different doses of radiation, and the
dedifferentiation of non-CSCs into CSCs was investigated via flow cytometry and
quantitative reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction for re-expression of
reprogramming factors.
RESULTS: Patients with HPV-positive tumors have superior overall survival and
local-regional control. Human papillomavirus-positive HNSCC cell lines have lower
numbers of CSCs, which inversely correlates with radiosensitivity. Human
papillomavirus-negative HNSCC cell lines lack hierarchy owing to enhanced
spontaneous dedifferentiation. Non-CSCs from HPV-negative lines show enhanced
radiation-induced dedifferentiation compared with HPV-positive lines, and RT
induced re-expression of Yamanaka reprogramming factors.
CONCLUSIONS: Supporting the favorable prognosis of HPV-positive HNSCCs, we show
that (1) HPV-positive HNSCCs have a lower frequency of CSCs; (2) RT can
dedifferentiate HNSCC cells into CSCs; and (3) radiation-induced
dedifferentiation depends on the HPV status of the tumor.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijrobp.2016.01.005 
PMCID: PMC4817367
PMID: 27026319  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
