

1777. Indian J Med Res. 2010 Oct;132:415-22.

Effect of suicide gene therapy in combination with immunotherapy on antitumour
immune response & tumour regression in a xenograft mouse model for head & neck
squamous cell carcinoma.

Ambade AV(1), Joshi GV, Mulherkar R.

Author information: 
(1)Advanced Center for Treatment Research & Education in Cancer (ACTREC), Tata
Memorial Centre, Navi Mumbai, India.

BACKGROUND & OBJECTIVES: Prodrug activation strategy as well as immunotherapy
have been widely used for cancer gene therapy. In the present study, using a head
and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) xenograft nude mouse model, we have
investigated whether the two therapies in combination could improve tumour cell
kill. We also investigated induction of immune effector cells viz., NK (DX5+) and
DC (CD11c+) in vivo, post-combination gene therapy.
METHODS: A retroviral vector producing cell line (PLTK47.1 VPC) carrying Herpes
simplex virus thymidine kinase gene (HSVtk) was used for intratumoural injection 
into NT8e xenograft tumours followed by the prodrug ganciclovir (GCV). IL-2
plasmid DNA was injected intramuscularly. Immune cells were analyzed by
flow-cytometry. Non parametric ANOVA was performed with Kruskal Wallis test.
RESULTS: IL-2 could induce proliferation of both NK cells (DX5+) and dendritic
cells (CD11c+) in vivo. Apoptosis was higher in combination therapy group as
compared to HSVtk/GCV alone or IL-2 alone and was mediated through caspase-3
dependent pathway. Significant reduction in tumour volume was seen in all 3
treatment arms as compared to controls.
INTERPRETATION & CONCLUSIONS: Combination of suicide gene therapy and
immunotherapy leads to successful tumour regression in a HNSCC xenograft mouse
model. Immunotherapy could help in a systemic long lived anti-tumour immune
response which would prove powerful for the treatment of metastatic cancers, and 
also for minimal residual disease. The results of this study may form the basis
for Phase 1 clinical trials.


PMID: 20966520  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
