

1794. Int J Cancer. 2014 Jun 15;134(12):2755-63. doi: 10.1002/ijc.28411. Epub 2013 Aug 
29.

The interplay between HPV and host immunity in head and neck squamous cell
carcinoma.

Andersen AS(1), Koldjaer Sølling AS, Ovesen T, Rusan M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Aarhus University Hospital, Aarhus,
Denmark.

Persistent infection with human papillomavirus (HPV) type 16 is a major risk
factor for the development of head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC), in
particular oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma (OPSCC). The oropharyngeal
epithelium differs from the mucosal epithelium at other commonly HPV16-infected
sites (i.e., cervix and anogenital region) in that it is juxtaposed with the
underlying lymphatic tissue, serving a key immunologic function in the
surveillance of inhaled and ingested pathogens. Therefore, the natural history of
infection and immune response to HPV at this site may differ from that at other
anatomic locations. This review summarizes the literature concerning the adaptive
immune response against HPV in the context of HNSCC, with a focus on the T-cell
response. Recent studies have shown that a broad repertoire of tumor-infiltrating
HPV-specific T-cells are found in nearly all patients with HPV-positive tumors. A
systemic response is found in only a proportion of these. Furthermore, the local 
response is more frequent in OPSCC patients than in cervical cancer patients and 
HPV-negative OPSCC patients. Despite this, tumor persistence may be facilitated
by abnormalities in antigen processing, a skewed T-helper cell response, and an
increased local prevalence of T-regulatory cells. Nonetheless, the immunologic
profile of HPV-positive vs. HPV-negative HNSCC is associated with a significantly
better outcome, and the HPV-specific immune response is suggested to play a role 
in the significantly better response to therapy of HPV-positive patients.
Immunoprofiling may prove a valuable prognostic tool, and immunotherapy trials
targeting HPV are underway, providing hope for decreasing treatment-related
toxicity.

© 2013 UICC.

DOI: 10.1002/ijc.28411 
PMID: 23913554  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
