

1797. J Immunol. 2014 Jan 1;192(1):503-11. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1301951. Epub 2013 Dec
4.

Expansion of CMV-mediated NKG2C+ NK cells associates with the development of
specific de novo malignancies in liver-transplanted patients.

Achour A(1), Baychelier F, Besson C, Arnoux A, Marty M, Hannoun L, Samuel D,
Debré P, Vieillard V; K-GREF Study Group.

Collaborators: Azouley D, Bitker MO, Chapelier A, Couetil JP, Dartevelle P,
Delahousse M, Deleuze P, Dousset B, Glotz D, Hannoun L, Lang P, Barthes Fle P,
Nataf P, Niaudet P, Patard JJ, Pavie A, Rondeau E, Samuel D, Tiret E, Valla D,
Besson C, Debré P, Toubert A, Vieillard V, Puig L, Thervet L, Janin A, Raphaël M.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM, Unité Mixte de Recherche S945, Laboratoire Immunité et Infections,
F-75013 Paris, France;

Solid cancers are a major adverse outcome of orthotopic liver transplantation
(OLT). Although the use of chronic immunosuppression is known to play a role in T
cell impairment, recent insights into the specificities of NK cells led us to
reassess the potential modulation of this innate immune cell compartment after
transplantation. Our extensive phenotypic and functional study reveals that the
development of specific de novo noncutaneous tumors post-OLT is linked to unusual
NK cell subsets with maturation defects and to uncommon cytokine production
associated with the development of specific cancers. Remarkably, in CMV(+)
patients, the development de novo head/neck or colorectal tumors is linked to an 
aberrant expansion of NK cells expressing NKG2C and a high level of intracellular
TNF-α, which impact on their polyfunctional capacities. In contrast, NK cells
from patients diagnosed with genitourinary tumors possessed a standard immature
signature, including high expression of NKG2A and a robust production of IFN-γ.
Taken together, our results suggest that under an immunosuppressive environment, 
the interplay between the modulation of NK repertoire and CMV status may greatly 
hamper the spectrum of immune surveillance and thus favor outgrowth and the
development of specific de novo tumors after OLT.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.1301951 
PMID: 24307732  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
