

1803. Mutat Res Rev Mutat Res. 2017 Apr - Jun;772:78-104. doi:
10.1016/j.mrrev.2016.08.007. Epub 2016 Sep 4.

Insulin-like growth factor (IGF) axis in cancerogenesis.

Kasprzak A(1), Kwasniewski W(2), Adamek A(3), Gozdzicka-Jozefiak A(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Histology and Embryology, Poznan University of Medical Sciences,
60-781 Poznań, Poland. Electronic address: akasprza@ump.edu.pl.
(2)Department of Gynecological Oncology and Gynecology, Medical University of
Lublin, Lublin 20-081, Poland. Electronic address: wojciech.kwasniewski@umlub.pl.
(3)Department of Infectious Diseases, Poznan University of Medical Sciences,
61-285 Poznań, Poland. Electronic address: ab.adamek@wp.pl.
(4)Department of Molecular Virology, Adam Mickiewicz University, Poznań 61-614,
Poland. Electronic address: agjozef@amu.edu.pl.

Determination of the role of insulin-like growth factor (IGF) family components
in carcinogenesis of several human tumors is based on numerous epidemiological
and pre-clinical studies, experiments in vivo and in vitro and on attempts at
application of drugs affecting the IGF axis. Investigative hypotheses in original
studies were based on biological functions manifested by the entire family of IGF
(ligands, receptors, linking proteins, adaptor molecules). In the context of
carcinogenesis the most important functions of IGF family involve intensification
of proliferation and inhibition of cell apoptosis and effect on cell
transformation through synthesis of several regulatory proteins. IGF axis
controls survival and influences on metastases of cells. Interactions of IGF axis
components may be of a direct or indirect nature. The direct effects are linked
to activation of PI3K/Akt signaling pathway, in which the initiating role is
first of all played by IGF-1 and IGF-1R. Activity of this signaling pathway leads
to an increased mitogenesis, cell cycle progression, and protection against
different apoptotic stresses. Indirect effects of the axis depend on interactions
between IGF and other molecules important for cancer etiology (e.g. sex hormones,
products of suppressor genes, viruses, and other GFs) and the style of life
(nutrition, physical activity). From the clinical point of view, components of
IGF system are first of all considered as diagnostic serous and/or tissue
biomarkers of a given cancer, prognostic factors and attractive target of modern 
anti-tumor therapies. Several mechanisms in which IGF system components act in
the process of carcinogenesis need to be clarified, mainly due to multifactorial 
etiology of the neoplasms. Pin-pointing of the role played in carcinogenesis by
any single signaling pathway remains particularly difficult. The aim of this
review is to summarize the current data of several epidemiological studies,
experiments in vitro and on animal models, to increase our understanding of the
complex role of IGF family components in the most common human cancers.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.mrrev.2016.08.007 
PMID: 28528692  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
