

1806. Mod Pathol. 2012 Oct;25(10):1354-63. doi: 10.1038/modpathol.2012.91. Epub 2012
Jun 8.

Comprehensive analysis of human papillomavirus prevalence and the potential role 
of low-risk types in verrucous carcinoma.

del Pino M(1), Bleeker MC, Quint WG, Snijders PJ, Meijer CJ, Steenbergen RD.

Author information: 
(1)Unit of Molecular Pathology, Department of Pathology, VU University Medical
Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

The role of human papillomavirus (HPV) infections in the development of verrucous
carcinoma, a well-differentiated variant of squamous cell carcinoma with
difficult differential diagnosis, is controversial in the literature. In this
study, we analysed verrucous carcinoma from different origins for the presence
and activity of a broad spectrum of HPV types, and carefully reviewed the
histopathological features. A random series of 27 formalin-fixed,
paraffin-embedded specimens of verrucous carcinoma was taken, representing the
head and neck region (n=6), anogenital area (n=16) and extragenital skin region
(n=5). After review of the histological slides, all samples were subjected to
different polymerase chain reaction-based HPV detection techniques, together
detecting a total of 83 HPV types, including both mucosal and cutaneous types.
Histological revision was carefully performed. Lesions with keratinised papillae,
blunt stromal invaginations and minimal cytological atypia were considered
verrucous carcinoma. Condylomatous lesions with viral changes were defined as
giant condyloma. Verrucous lesions that did not meet those criteria were
classified as verrucous hyperplasia. Tumours with stromal infiltration were
considered as invasive squamous cell carcinoma. Histological revision revealed
that 13 out of 27 cases were verrucous carcinoma (one showing a double infection 
with HPV 35 and 45), 5 invasive squamous cell carcinomas, 5 verrucous hyperplasia
(one with a double infection with HPV 4 and 8), 1 pseudoepitheliomatous
hyperplasia and 3 giant condylomas. All three giant condylomas were low-risk HPV 
positive (HPV 6 and 11) and showed active mRNA transcription. None of the
HPV-positive samples tested positive for diffuse p16(INK4A) staining. In
conclusion, our results do not support a causal role of HPV in the development of
verrucous carcinoma. Testing for LR-HPV, particularly HPV 6 and 11, may help in
the differential diagnosis of lesions suspicious of verrucous carcinoma as those 
testing positive for LR-HPV most likely represent giant condylomas.

DOI: 10.1038/modpathol.2012.91 
PMID: 22684225  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
