

1819. Curr Top Med Chem. 2014;14(13):1574-89.

Targeting chemokine receptor CXCR4 for treatment of HIV-1 infection, tumor
progression, and metastasis.

Choi WT, Yang Y, Xu Y, An J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, State University of New York, Upstate Medical
University, 750 East Adams Street, Syracuse, NY 13210, USA. anji@upstate.edu.

The chemokine receptor CXCR4 is required for the entry of human immunodeficiency 
virus type 1 (HIV-1) into target cells and for the development and dissemination 
of various types of cancers, including gastrointestinal, cutaneous, head and
neck, pulmonary, gynecological, genitourinary, neurological, and hematological
malignancies. The T-cell (T)-tropic HIV-1 strains use CXCR4 as the entry
coreceptor; consequently, multiple CXCR4 antagonistic inhibitors have been
developed for the treatment of acquired immune deficiency syndrome (AIDS).
However, other potential applications of CXCR4 antagonists have become apparent
since its discovery in 1996. In fact, increasing evidence demonstrates that
epithelial and hematopoietic tumor cells exploit the interaction between CXCR4
and its natural ligand, stromal cellderived factor (SDF)-1α, which normally
regulates leukocyte migration. The CXCR4 and/or SDF-1α expression patterns in
tumor cells also determine the sites of metastatic spread. In addition, the
activation of CXCR4 by SDF-1α promotes invasion and proliferation of tumor cells,
enhances tumor-associated neoangiogenesis, and assists in the degradation of the 
extracellular matrix and basement membrane. As such, the evaluation of CXCR4
and/or SDF-1α expression levels has a significant prognostic value in various
types of malignancies. Several therapeutic challenges remain to be overcome
before the use of CXCR4 inhibitors can be translated into clinical practice, but 
promising preclinical data demonstrate that CXCR4 antagonists can mobilize tumor 
cells from their protective microenvironments, interfere with their metastatic
and tumorigenic potentials, and/or make tumor cells more susceptible to
chemotherapy.


PMCID: PMC4372248
PMID: 25159167  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
