

1840. Anticancer Res. 2013 May;33(5):1951-61.

Chemotherapeutic alteration of VEGF, PDGF and PDGFRα/β expression under 5-FU vs. 
docetaxel in HPV-transformed squamous cell carcinoma compared to HPV-negative
HNSCC in vitro.

Aderhold C(1), Umbreit C, Faber A, Sauter A, Sommer JU, Birk R, Erben P, Hofheinz
RD, Stern-Straeter J, Hörmann K, Schultz JD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology Head and Neck Surgery, University Hospital
Mannheim, Theodor-Kutzer-Ufer 1-3, 68167 Mannheim, Germany.
christoph.aderhold@umm.de

BACKGROUND: Head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) is the most common
malignant epithelial tumor in the upper aerodigestive tract. The incidence of
HNSCC induced by the oncogenic human papilloma virus (HPV) is rising, indicating 
a growing importance of the viral etiology. Cell proliferation, migration and
tumor vascularization are regulated by a set of angiogenic peptides such as PDGF 
(platelet-derived growth factor), PDGFRα/β (platelet-derived growth factor
receptor α/β) and VEGF (vascular endothelial growth factor). In locally advanced 
HNSCC docetaxel is used for induction chemotherapy (ICT) combined with
platinum-based chemotherapy and 5-fluorouracil (5-FU). This study sought to
evaluate the expression of angiogenic factors (VEGF, PDGF and PDGFRα/β) in
HPV-positive (CERV196) and HPV-negative squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC 11A and
14C) and the efficacy of chemotherapy with docetaxel as a potential treatment
modality, compared to 5-FU as a single-drug application.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Tumor cell lines were incubated with 5-FU or docetaxel at 
a concentration of 1.0 and 5.0 μmol/ml. Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA)
and immunohistochemical analyses were carried out after 48, 72, 120, 192 and 240 
hours, in order to identify changes in protein expression of VEGF, PDGF and
PDGFRα/β.
RESULTS: We demonstrated a significant reduction of VEGF and PDGFRβ expression
after incubation with docetaxel by ELISA and of PDGF by immunohistochemistry,
irrespective of the HPV status, whereas the application of 5-FU had a
significantly weaker impact on the expression of angiogenic peptides.
HPV-positive CERV196 cells were characterized by a reduced susceptibility to a
docetaxel-altered expression.
CONCLUSION: Although neither of the applied drugs are selective anti-angiogenic
agents, docetaxel surprisingly was demonstrated to cause a significant decrease
of angiogenic factors in this study.


PMID: 23645743  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
