

1841. Surgeon. 2017 Jun;15(3):147-154. doi: 10.1016/j.surge.2016.09.004. Epub 2016 Oct 
11.

Role of transoral robotic surgery in current head & neck practice.

Hamilton D(1), Paleri V(2).

Author information: 
(1)Freeman Hospital, Newcastle upon Tyne NE7 7DN, UK. Electronic address:
david.hamilton@ncl.ac.uk.
(2)Freeman Hospital, Newcastle upon Tyne NE7 7DN, UK.

Morbidity and mortality associated with increasingly radical doses of
chemoradiotherapy have led many to question the current standard of care in head 
and neck cancer. Recently, surgeons have developed minimally invasive, transoral 
techniques which have demonstrated excellent survival and favourable functional
outcomes. Transoral robotic surgery (TORS) is the most recent, cutting edge in
the evolution of transoral techniques; TORS allows surgeons unprecedented access 
to and visualisation of the upper aerodigestive tract. Early reports of TORS in
the head and neck are favourable in both primary and recurrent disease. TORS has 
a role in the assessment of the patient with unknown primary and in the
de-intensification of therapy in patients with cancers secondary to human
papilloma virus. In this review we discuss the practical set up and technical
features of TORS surgery and the application of TORS in primary and recurrent
disease, and carcinoma of unknown primary. We outline the current ongoing
research into the use of this technique and set out the vision for the future of 
this surgical modality. Surgical care for upper aerodigestive tract cancers has
changed dramatically over the last three decades with technological advances in
tumour imaging and resection. Recent advances in mechanical instrumentation and
energy devices allow surgeons to remove head and neck cancers transorally; it is 
only rarely that the extrinsic muscles of the neck and the tongue are involved
and the transoral route leads to reduced disruption of the external musculature, 
quicker recovery and a better functional outcome. In this review we will focus
exclusively on the advances in transoral robotic surgery which have transformed
the shape of resective head and neck cancer surgery.

Crown Copyright © 2016. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.surge.2016.09.004 
PMID: 27742406  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
