

1843. Laryngoscope. 2011 Aug;121(8):1718-25. doi: 10.1002/lary.21871.

Association between Epstein-Barr virus seroconversion and immunohistochemical
changes in tonsils of pediatric solid organ transplant recipients.

Shapiro NL(1), Tang CG, Bhattacharyya N.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Head and Neck Surgery, Department of Surgery, David Geffen School 
of Medicine at UCLA, Los Angeles, California 90095, USA. nshapiro@ucla.edu

OBJECTIVES/HYPOTHESIS: Assess whether changes in Epstein-Barr virus (EBV)
serology status relates to immunohistochemical evidence of active EBV infection
in tonsillar tissue of pediatric organ transplant recipients. Children who
seroconvert from EBV seronegative to seropositive status following organ
transplantation are more likely to develop evidence of active EBV tonsillar
infection than those who do not seroconvert. Active EBV infection is a potential 
early precursor of post-transplantation lymphoproliferative disorder (PTLD), a
life- and/or organ-threatening disease.
STUDY DESIGN: Retrospective analysis of pathology specimens and EBV serology
titers of pediatric organ transplant recipients at a tertiary care academic
medical center.
METHODS: Immunohistochemical staining of tonsillectomy specimens and analysis of 
EBV serology titers were performed on 47 post-transplantation children. Eligible 
patients included those under age 21 years referred for tonsillectomy who had
undergone solid organ transplantation. Data reviewed included gender, age at
transplantation, age at tonsillectomy, interval between organ transplantation and
tonsillectomy, and type of organ transplanted. EBV was detected in tonsil
specimens by in situ hybridization for EBV-encoded small nuclear RNA (EBV-EBER), 
an indicator of active EBV infection, and EBV-encoded latent membrane protein
(EBV-LMP), an indicator of latent EBV infection. Immunohistochemical staining of 
B-cell clonality was performed for kappa and lambda light chains. EBV serologies 
pre- and post-transplantation were obtained from electronic medical record data.
RESULTS: Forty-seven children having tonsillectomy following solid organ
transplantation were included. Of the 47 patients, 25 (53.5%) were EBV
seronegative both before transplantation and at the time of tonsillectomy, eight 
(17.0%) were EBV seronegative prior to transplantation but converted to EBV
seropositivity in the early (≤ 6 months) post-transplantation period, eight
(17.0%) were seronegative prior to transplantation but converted to EBV
seropositive in the late (≥ 6 months) post-transplantation period, and six
(12.8%) were EBV seropositive prior to transplantation and remained so at the
time of tonsillectomy. Overall, 20 specimens (42.6%) were positive for EBV-EBER, 
and three specimens (6.4%) were positive for EBV-LMP. There was significant
difference in the percentage of EBV-EBER positive specimens among the four groups
(P = .020). One out of eight (12.5%) of the early seroconversion group had
specimens showing EBV-EBER, wheras seven out of eight (87.5%) of the late
seroconversion group had tonsil specimens showing EBV-EBER (P = .005). There was 
no significant difference in presence of EBV-LMP among the four groups (P =
.667).
CONCLUSIONS: Almost one half of post-transplantation children undergoing
tonsillectomy have evidence of active EBV tonsillar infection, which was more
likely in children who seroconverted from EBV-seronegative to EBV-seropositive in
the late post-transplantation period than those who seroconverted in the early
post-transplantation period. Based on these novel findings, continued
surveillance of EBV status and adenotonsillar hypertrophy in this population
should include monitoring of pretransplantation EBV status and timing of
seroconversion.

Copyright © 2011 The American Laryngological, Rhinological, and Otological
Society, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/lary.21871 
PMID: 21792960  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
