

1850. Presse Med. 2014 Dec;43(12 Pt 2):e423-8. doi: 10.1016/j.lpm.2014.10.001. Epub
2014 Oct 30.

HPV in genital cancers (at the exception of cervical cancer) and anal cancers.

de Sanjosé S(1), Bruni L(2), Alemany L(3).

Author information: 
(1)Unit of infections and cancer, Cancer epidemiology research program, Catalan
institute of oncology, IDIBELL, L'Hospitalet de Llobregat, Barcelona, Spain;
CIBER en epidemiología y salud pública (CIBERESP), Barcelona, Spain. Electronic
address: s.sanjose@iconcologia.net.
(2)Unit of infections and cancer, Cancer epidemiology research program, Catalan
institute of oncology, IDIBELL, L'Hospitalet de Llobregat, Barcelona, Spain.
(3)Unit of infections and cancer, Cancer epidemiology research program, Catalan
institute of oncology, IDIBELL, L'Hospitalet de Llobregat, Barcelona, Spain;
CIBER en epidemiología y salud pública (CIBERESP), Barcelona, Spain.

Human papillomavirus (HPV) infection has been firmly established as a central and
necessary cause of invasive cervical cancer and it has been etiologically linked 
to other anogenital (vulva, vagina, anus and penis) and head and neck cancers,
particularly oropharyngeal. Although being rare, the incidence of some of these
cancers in some countries has increased in the last decades. HPV-related
anogenital tumors share many risk factors with cervical cancer. The HPV
aetiological contribution differs in each anatomical location reflecting
differences in the natural history and viral tissue tropism. The highest
prevalence of HPV DNA in cancers other than cervix has been described for anal,
followed by vagina, penile and vulvar cancers. HPV16 has been described as the
most common type detected in all cancer sites with different contributions being 
the highest in anal carcinoma (around 80% of HPV DNA positive anal cancers) and
the lowest in vaginal cancers with a contribution similar to that found in
cervical cancers (around 60%). Current HPV vaccines have already demonstrated
their efficacy in preventing anogenital pre-neoplastic lesions caused by vaccine 
HPV types. HPV-based prevention tools like HPV vaccination and to a lesser extend
screening (e.g. for anal cancer) can be useful measures for reducing the burden
of these anogenital cancers.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.lpm.2014.10.001 
PMID: 25455637  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
