

1854. Rom J Morphol Embryol. 2014;55(3 Suppl):1057-62.

Detection of Merkel cell polyomavirus in formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded tissue
of Merkel cell carcinoma and correlation with prognosis.

Andea AA(1), Patel R, Ponnazhagan S, Isayeva T, Kumar S, Siegal GP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA;
andeaa@med.umich.edu.

Merkel cell carcinoma (MCC) is a rare, but highly aggressive primary cutaneous
malignancy, showing neuroendocrine differentiation. In 2008, a novel member of
the polyomavirus family, named Merkel cell polyomavirus (MCPyV) was identified in
the genome of MCC tumors raising the possibility of an involvement in its
pathogenesis. Due to the rarity of this tumor and current pathology practices,
the most readily available tissue is archival formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded
(FFPE) material. In this study, we evaluated the presence of MCPyV in FFPE tissue
and correlated its presence with tumor progression. Representative FFPE specimens
from 18 tumors belonging to 14 patients with a diagnosis of MCC spanning the
period from 2003 to 2008 were retrieved. Following DNA extraction, we performed
PCR amplification and sequencing with four different MCPyV-specific primer pairs 
mapping within the T antigen and VP1 region. Overall, we detected MCPyV amplicons
in 8/18 (44.4%) analyzed tumors from 7/14 (50%) cases. Two-year survival rate and
median survival for the MCPyV-positive MCCs were 48% and 22.5 months,
respectively and for the negative ones 69% and 51.3 months, respectively;
however, the difference did not reach statistical significance (p=0.8). There was
no significant correlation between the presence of the virus and the stage at
presentation; however, tumors in the head and neck area had a lower frequency of 
viral positivity compared to those arising in the extremities suggesting a
MCPyV-independent oncogenetic pathway perhaps, dependent on UV exposure, in a
subset of these cases.


PMID: 25607385  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
