

1857. Cancer Res. 2014 Dec 1;74(23):6833-44. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-14-0602-T. Epub
2014 Oct 1.

TGFβ receptor 1: an immune susceptibility gene in HPV-associated cancer.

Levovitz C(1), Chen D(2), Ivansson E(2), Gyllensten U(2), Finnigan JP(3),
Alshawish S(3), Zhang W(4), Schadt EE(5), Posner MR(6), Genden EM(7), Boffetta
P(8), Sikora AG(9).

Author information: 
(1)The Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, New York. Department of
Immunology, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, New York.
Institute for Translational Epidemiology, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount
Sinai, New York, New York.
(2)SciLifeLab Uppsala, Rudbeck Laboratory, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden.
(3)The Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, New York.
(4)Mount Sinai Department of Medicine, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai,
New York, New York.
(5)Department of Oncological Sciences, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai,
New York, New York. Mount Sinai Institute for Genomics and Multiscale Biology,
New York, New York.
(6)The Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, New York. Department of
Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai,
New York, New York.
(7)The Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, New York. Department of
Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai,
New York, New York. Department of Immunology, Genetics and Pathology, Tisch
Cancer Institute, New York, New York.
(8)The Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, New York. Institute for
Translational Epidemiology, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York,
New York. Department of Immunology, Genetics and Pathology, Tisch Cancer
Institute, New York, New York.
(9)The Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, New York. Department of
Immunology, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, New York.
Department of Oncological Sciences, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New 
York, New York. Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Icahn School 
of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, New York. Department of Immunology,
Genetics and Pathology, Tisch Cancer Institute, New York, New York.
andrew.sikora@bcm.edu.

Only a minority of those exposed to human papillomavirus (HPV) develop
HPV-related cervical and oropharyngeal cancer. Because host immunity affects
infection and progression to cancer, we tested the hypothesis that genetic
variation in immune-related genes is a determinant of susceptibility to
oropharyngeal cancer and other HPV-associated cancers by performing a multitier
integrative computational analysis with oropharyngeal cancer data from a head and
neck cancer genome-wide association study (GWAS). Independent analyses, including
single-gene, gene-interconnectivity, protein-protein interaction, gene
expression, and pathway analysis, identified immune genes and pathways
significantly associated with oropharyngeal cancer. TGFβR1, which intersected all
tiers of analysis and thus selected for validation, replicated significantly in
the head and neck cancer GWAS limited to HPV-seropositive cases and an
independent cervical cancer GWAS. The TGFβR1 containing p38-MAPK pathway was
significantly associated with oropharyngeal cancer and cervical cancer, and
TGFβR1 was overexpressed in oropharyngeal cancer, cervical cancer, and HPV(+)
head and neck cancer tumors. These concordant analyses implicate TGFβR1 signaling
as a process dysregulated across HPV-related cancers. This study demonstrates
that genetic variation in immune-related genes is associated with susceptibility 
to oropharyngeal cancer and implicates TGFβR1/TGFβ signaling in the development
of both oropharyngeal cancer and cervical cancer. Better understanding of the
immunogenetic basis of susceptibility to HPV-associated cancers may provide
insight into host/virus interactions and immune processes dysregulated in the
minority of HPV-exposed individuals who progress to cancer.

©2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-14-0602-T 
PMCID: PMC4496416
PMID: 25273091  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
