

1861. Laryngoscope. 2012 Sep;122 Suppl 2:S13-33. doi: 10.1002/lary.23493.

Prognostic factors and survival unique to surgically treated p16+ oropharyngeal
cancer.

Haughey BH(1), Sinha P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology, Washington University School of Medicine, St.
Louis, Missouri, USA. haugheyb@ent.wustl.edu

OBJECTIVES/HYPOTHESIS: Current head and neck epidemiology demonstrates a steadily
increasing incidence of p16+ human papillomavirus-related oropharynx squamous
cell cancer (OPSCC). This distinct tumor subtype is associated with better
survival outcomes. There is a growing recognition of the need to define
management regimens that take into account the inherent patho-biological
attributes of these cancers and provide optimum oncological control with minimum 
morbidity. This is facilitated by a clear understanding of the prognostic
variables that predict disease outcome in patients with p16+ OPSCC. To provide
prognostic estimates, pathological staging and histopathological parameters are
usually superior to clinical staging. However, knowledge of pathological
predictors is sparse, mainly because of commonly employed nonsurgical management 
policies utilizing chemoradiotherapy. Minimally invasive approaches to the
oropharynx, particularly transoral laser microsurgery (TLM), are well-reported
effective primary treatments for oropharynx cancers. From such series, it is
feasible to conduct a detailed appraisal based on pathologic information from
surgical specimens of both the primary and neck, to establish prognosticators
unique to p16+ oropharynx cancer patients.
STUDY DESIGN: A prospectively assembled database of oropharynx cancer patients
treated with primary TLM ± neck dissection ± adjuvant therapy from 1996 to 2010, 
analyzed retrospectively for survival and recurrence.
METHODS: The fundamental inclusion criteria were: 1) previously untreated
biopsy-proven OPSCC treated with primary TLM ± neck dissection, 2) diffuse p16
positivity in the surgical specimen, 3) availability for adjuvant therapy, if
indicated, and 4), minimum follow-up of 12 months or to death. Cox proportional
hazard regression analyses were used to identify variables that were prognostic
for disease-free survival (DFS), the primary end point of the study, as well as
disease-specific survival (DSS) and overall survival. Kaplan-Meier survival
estimates and patterns of disease recurrence were also assessed. We also explored
concordance for T and N staging, when assessed by clinical (cT, cN) and
pathological (cT, pT) measures.
RESULTS: Of 211 patients in the TLM database, 171 met all the eligibility
criteria. The median follow-up was 47 months. The 3- and 5-year Kaplan-Meier
estimates for DFS were 91% and 88%, respectively, whereas for DSS they were 95.5%
and 94.4%, respectively. A total of 12 (7%) recurrences occurred: two local, four
regional, and six distant. Of all T-stage categories, pT4 tumors were strongest
predictors of poorer DFS. cT4 tonsil primaries, ever smoking status, three or
more metastatic nodes, pN2b+ stage, and radiation-based adjuvant therapy were
other prognosticators for DFS. Angioinvasion and T3-T4 tumors were prognostic for
reduced DSS, although smoking parameters were not. Extracapsular spread, N stage,
and margins were nonprognosticators. Recursive partitioning analysis defined
high- and low-risk groupings of prognosticators. Downstaging of clinical T stage 
was observed for 31% of tumors on application of pathological classification.
CONCLUSIONS: We document a well-delineated set of prognostic variables that
specifically and accurately identify individuals at risk of reduced outcomes in
an otherwise good prognosis p16+ OPSCC cohort. Based on these prognosticators,
appropriate patient counseling, adjuvant treatment recommendations, and
stratification for trials can more accurately be made. We also observed an
additional edge conferred by TLM toward more accurate clinical as well as
pathological T staging.

Copyright © 2012 The American Laryngological, Rhinological, and Otological
Society, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/lary.23493 
PMID: 22926949  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
