

1880. P R Health Sci J. 2016 Mar;35(1):3-8.

Pathway Analysis using Gene-expression Profiles of HPV-positive and HPV-negative 
Oropharyngeal Cancer Patients in a Hispanic Population: Methodological
Procedures.

Suárez E(1), González L(2), Pérez-Mitchell C(3), Ortiz AP(4), Ramírez-Sola M(5), 
Acosta J(6), Bernabe-Dones RD(7), González-Aquino C(8), Montes-Rodríguez I(9),
Cadilla CL(10).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biostatistics and Epidemiology, Graduate School of Public
Health, University of Puerto Rico Medical Sciences Campus, San Juan, PR.
(2)Puerto Rico Clinical and Translational Research Consortium, University of
Puerto Rico Medical Sciences Campus, San Juan, PR.
(3)Center for Cranial Base, Head, and Neck Surgery, HIMA Health San Pablo Group, 
Caguas, PR; Department of Otolaryngology, School of Medicine, University of
Puerto Rico Medical Sciences Campus, San Juan, PR.
(4)Department of Biostatistics and Epidemiology, Graduate School of Public
Health, University of Puerto Rico Medical Sciences Campus, San Juan, PR;
University of Puerto Rico Comprehensive Cancer Center, San Juan, PR.
(5)Cancer Center of HIMA Health San Pablo Group, Caguas, PR.
(6)Center for Cranial Base, Head, and Neck Surgery, HIMA Health San Pablo Group, 
Caguas, PR.
(7)University of Puerto Rico Comprehensive Cancer Center, San Juan, PR; School of
Health Professions, University of Puerto Rico Medical Sciences Campus, San Juan, 
PR.
(8)Department of Otolaryngology, School of Medicine, University of Puerto Rico
Medical Sciences Campus, San Juan, PR.
(9)Department of Chemistry, University of Puerto Rico Mayagüez Campus.
(10)Department of Biochemistry, School of Medicine and RCMI Center for Genomics
in Health Disparities and Rare Diseases, University of Puerto Rico Medical
Sciences Campus, San Juan, PR.

OBJECTIVE: The incidence of oral cavity and pharyngeal cancer in Puerto Rican men
is higher than it is in the men of any other ethnic/racial group in the United
States of America (US). The information regarding the effect of the human
papilloma virus (HPV) in the gene-expression profile among patients with this
cancer is limited in Hispanic community. We aim to describe the methodology for
future studies to identify the molecular networks for determining overrepresented
signaling and metabolic canonical pathways, based on the differential
gene-expression profiles of HPV+ and HPV- samples from patients with
oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma in Puerto Rico.
METHODS: We analyzed the RNA expression of 5 tissue samples from subjects
diagnosed with oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma, 2 HPV+ and 3 HPV-, using
Affymetrix GeneChips. The relative difference between the average gene
expressions of the HPV+ and HPV- samples was assessed, based on the fold change
(log2-scale).
RESULTS: Our analysis revealed 10 up regulated molecules (Mup1, LRP1, P14KA,
ALYREF, and BHMT) and 5 down regulated ones (PSME4, KEAP1, ELK3, FAM186B, and
PRELID1), at a cutoff of 1.5-fold change. Ingenuity Pathway Analysis showed the
following biological functions to be affected in the HPV+ samples: cancer,
hematological disease, and RNA post-transcriptional modification. QRT-PCR
analysis confirmed only the differential regulation of ALYREF, KEAP1, and FAM186B
genes.
CONCLUSION: The relevant methodological procedures described are sufficient to
detect the most significant biological functions and pathways according to the
HPV status in patients with oropharyngeal cancer in Puerto Rico.


PMCID: PMC4999560
PMID: 26932277  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
