

1882. Ann Oncol. 2011 Aug;22(8):1878-85. doi: 10.1093/annonc/mdr130. Epub 2011 Apr 27.

The presence of circulating tumor cells (CTCs) correlates with lymph node
metastasis in nonresectable squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck region
(SCCHN).

Hristozova T(1), Konschak R, Stromberger C, Fusi A, Liu Z, Weichert W, Stenzinger
A, Budach V, Keilholz U, Tinhofer I.

Author information: 
(1)Translational Radiobiology and Radiooncology Research Laboratory, Department
of Radiotherapy, Charité Campus Mitte, Berlin, Germany.

BACKGROUND: The mechanisms regulating tumor cell dissemination in locally
advanced squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck region (SCCHN) are largely 
unresolved. We assessed the frequency of circulating tumor cells (CTCs), their
association with clinicopathologic parameters and their kinetics during
radiochemotherapy.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Peripheral blood samples from 42 patients with locally
advanced SCCHN were included. CTCs were detected using flow cytometric analysis
of CD45-epithelial cell adhesion molecule+cytokeratin+ cells and results were
validated by nested RT-PCR analysis of circulating epidermal growth factor
receptor transcripts. The association between the presence of CTCs and T stage,
tumor volume, N stage and human papillomavirus status was evaluated. The
influence of radiochemotherapy on CTC numbers was determined.
RESULTS: CTCs were detected in 18 of 42 SCCHN patients (43%), with a mean ±
standard deviation of 1.7 ± 0.9 CTCs per 3.75 ml blood. We observed no
significant correlation between the presence of CTCs and T stage or tumor volume.
However, a nodal stage of N2b or higher was associated with higher frequency of
CTCs. Though concurrent radiochemotherapy reduced their frequency, CTCs persisted
during treatment in 20% of cases.
CONCLUSIONS: Detection of CTCs correlates with regional metastasis in inoperable 
SCCHN. Further follow-up is needed to evaluate the prognostic significance of CTC
detection, in addition to clinical staging of lymph nodes, for regional or
distant recurrence.

DOI: 10.1093/annonc/mdr130 
PMID: 21525401  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
