

1893. Gene Ther. 2016 Jul;23(7):572-9. doi: 10.1038/gt.2016.29. Epub 2016 Mar 11.

Adenovirus-mediated hAQP1 expression in irradiated mouse salivary glands causes
recovery of saliva secretion by enhancing acinar cell volume decrease.

Teos LY(1), Zheng CY(2), Liu X(1), Swaim WD(3), Goldsmith CM(2), Cotrim AP(2),
Baum BJ(3), Ambudkar IS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Secretory and Physiology Section, Molecular Physiology and Therapeutics
Branch, NIDCR, NIH, Bethesda, MD, USA.
(2)Translational Research Core, Molecular Physiology and Therapeutics Branch,
NIDCR, NIH, Bethesda, MD, USA.
(3)Molecular Physiology and Therapeutics Branch, NIDCR, NIH, Bethesda, MD, USA.

Head and neck irradiation (IR) during cancer treatment causes by-stander effects 
on the salivary glands leading to irreversible loss of saliva secretion. The
mechanism underlying loss of fluid secretion is not understood and no adequate
therapy is currently available. Delivery of an adenoviral vector encoding human
aquaporin-1 (hAQP1) into the salivary glands of human subjects and animal models 
with radiation-induced salivary hypofunction leads to significant recovery of
saliva secretion and symptomatic relief in subjects. To elucidate the mechanism
underlying loss of salivary secretion and the basis for AdhAQP1-dependent
recovery of salivary gland function we assessed submandibular gland function in
control mice and mice 2 and 8 months after treatment with a single 15-Gy dose of 
IR (delivered to the salivary gland region). Salivary secretion and
neurotransmitter-stimulated changes in acinar cell volume, an in vitro read-out
for fluid secretion, were monitored. Consistent with the sustained 60% loss of
fluid secretion following IR, a carbachol (CCh)-induced decrease in acinar cell
volume from the glands of mice post IR was transient and attenuated as compared
with that in cells from non-IR age-matched mice. The hAQP1 expression in non-IR
mice induced no significant effect on salivary fluid secretion or CCh-stimulated 
cell volume changes, except in acinar cells from 8-month group where the initial 
rate of cell shrinkage was increased. Importantly, the expression of hAQP1 in the
glands of mice post IR induced recovery of salivary fluid secretion and a volume 
decrease in acinar cells to levels similar to those in cells from non-IR mice.
The initial rates of CCh-stimulated cell volume reduction in acinar cells from
hAQP1-expressing glands post IR were similar to those from control cells.
Altogether, the data suggest that expression of hAQP1 increases the water
permeability of acinar cells, which underlies the recovery of fluid secretion in 
the salivary glands functionally compromised post IR.

DOI: 10.1038/gt.2016.29 
PMCID: PMC5798877
PMID: 26966862  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
