

1900. J Virol. 2014 Jul;88(13):7307-16. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00621-14. Epub 2014 Apr 16.

Global genomic diversity of human papillomavirus 6 based on 724 isolates and 190 
complete genome sequences.

Jelen MM(1), Chen Z(2), Kocjan BJ(1), Burt FJ(3), Chan PK(4), Chouhy D(5),
Combrinck CE(3), Coutlée F(6), Estrade C(7), Ferenczy A(8), Fiander A(9), Franco 
EL(10), Garland SM(11), Giri AA(5), González JV(12), Gröning A(13), Heidrich
K(13), Hibbitts S(9), Hošnjak L(1), Luk TN(14), Marinic K(15), Matsukura T(16),
Neumann A(13), Oštrbenk A(1), Picconi MA(12), Richardson H(17), Sagadin M(1),
Sahli R(7), Seedat RY(18), Seme K(1), Severini A(19), Sinchi JL(15), Smahelova
J(20), Tabrizi SN(11), Tachezy R(20), Tohme S(19), Uloza V(21), Vitkauskiene
A(22), Wong YW(23), Zidovec Lepej S(24), Burk RD(25), Poljak M(26).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Microbiology and Immunology, Faculty of Medicine, University of
Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, New York, New
York, USA.
(3)Department of Medical Microbiology and Virology, Faculty of Health Sciences,
University of the Free State, Bloemfontein, South Africa.
(4)Department of Microbiology, Faculty of Medicine, Chinese University of Hong
Kong, Prince of Wales Hospital, Hong Kong Special Administrative Region, China.
(5)Human Virology Group, National Council of Scientific and Technical Research,
Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology of Rosario, Rosario, Argentina.
(6)Laboratoire de Virologie Moléculaire, Centre de Recherche, Centre Hospitalier 
de L'Université de Montréal, Hôpital Notre-Dame-Pavillon Deschamps, Montréal,
Québec, Canada.
(7)Lausanne University Hospital (CHUV), Institute of Microbiology, Lausanne,
Switzerland.
(8)Department of Pathology, McGill University and Jewish General Hospital,
Montréal, Québec, Canada.
(9)Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Cardiff University School of
Medicine, Institute of Cancer and Genetics, Cardiff, United Kingdom.
(10)Department of Oncology, Division of Cancer Epidemiology, McGill University,
Montréal, Québec, Canada.
(11)Department of Microbiology and Infectious Diseases, The Royal Women's
Hospital, Parkville, Victoria, Australia Department of Obstetrics and
Gynaecology, University of Melbourne, Victoria, Australia Murdoch Children's
Research Institute, Parkville, Victoria, Australia.
(12)Oncogenic Viruses Service, National Institute of Infectious Diseases-ANLIS
Dr. Carlos G. Malbrán, Buenos Aires, Argentina.
(13)Medizinisches Versorgungszentrum wagnerstibbe für Laboratoriumsmedizin und
Pathologie GmbH, Hannover, Germany.
(14)Dermatology Research Centre, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Prince of
Wales Hospital, Hong Kong Special Administrative Region, China Department of
Health, Social Hygiene Service, Centre for Health Protection, Hong Kong Special
Administrative Region, China.
(15)Histocompatibility and Molecular Genetics Laboratory, Dr. Julio C. Perrando
Hospital, Resistencia, Chaco, Argentina.
(16)Ganshintetsu Memorial Laboratory, Department of Virology II, National
Institute of Health, Tokyo, Japan.
(17)Queen's Cancer Research Institute, Queen's University, Kingston, Ontario,
Canada.
(18)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of 
the Free State, Bloemfontein, South Africa.
(19)Viral Exanthemata and STD Section, National Microbiology Laboratory, Public
Health Agency of Canada, Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada.
(20)Department of Experimental Virology, National Reference Laboratory for
Papillomaviruses, Institute of Hematology and Blood Transfusion, Prague, Czech
Republic.
(21)Department of Otolaryngology, Lithuanian University of Health Sciences,
Medical Academy, Kaunas, Lithuania.
(22)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Lithuanian University of Health Sciences, 
Medical Academy, Kaunas, Lithuania.
(23)DNA Laboratories Sdn. Bhd., UKM-MTDC Technology Centre, Universti Kebangsaan 
Malaysia, Bangi, Malaysia.
(24)Department of Molecular Diagnostics, University Hospital for Infectious
Diseases Dr. Fran Mihaljević, Zagreb, Croatia.
(25)Departments of Microbiology and Immunology, Epidemiology and Population
Health, Obstetrics and Gynecology and Women's Health, Albert Einstein College of 
Medicine, New York, New York, USA Department of Pediatrics, Albert Einstein
College of Medicine, New York, New York, USA.
(26)Institute of Microbiology and Immunology, Faculty of Medicine, University of 
Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia mario.poljak@mf.uni-lj.si.

Human papillomavirus type 6 (HPV6) is the major etiological agent of anogenital
warts and laryngeal papillomas and has been included in both the quadrivalent and
nonavalent prophylactic HPV vaccines. This study investigated the global genomic 
diversity of HPV6, using 724 isolates and 190 complete genomes from six
continents, and the association of HPV6 genomic variants with geographical
location, anatomical site of infection/disease, and gender. Initially, a 2,800-bp
E5a-E5b-L1-LCR fragment was sequenced from 492/530 (92.8%) HPV6-positive samples 
collected for this study. Among them, 130 exhibited at least one single
nucleotide polymorphism (SNP), indel, or amino acid change in the E5a-E5b-L1-LCR 
fragment and were sequenced in full. A global alignment and maximum likelihood
tree of 190 complete HPV6 genomes (130 fully sequenced in this study and 60
obtained from sequence repositories) revealed two variant lineages, A and B, and 
five B sublineages: B1, B2, B3, B4, and B5. HPV6 (sub)lineage-specific SNPs and a
960-bp representative region for whole-genome-based phylogenetic clustering
within the L2 open reading frame were identified. Multivariate logistic
regression analysis revealed that lineage B predominated globally. Sublineage B3 
was more common in Africa and North and South America, and lineage A was more
common in Asia. Sublineages B1 and B3 were associated with anogenital infections,
indicating a potential lesion-specific predilection of some HPV6 sublineages.
Females had higher odds for infection with sublineage B3 than males. In
conclusion, a global HPV6 phylogenetic analysis revealed the existence of two
variant lineages and five sublineages, showing some degree of ethnogeographic,
gender, and/or disease predilection in their distribution.IMPORTANCE: This study 
established the largest database of globally circulating HPV6 genomic variants
and contributed a total of 130 new, complete HPV6 genome sequences to available
sequence repositories. Two HPV6 variant lineages and five sublineages were
identified and showed some degree of association with geographical location,
anatomical site of infection/disease, and/or gender. We additionally identified
several HPV6 lineage- and sublineage-specific SNPs to facilitate the
identification of HPV6 variants and determined a representative region within the
L2 gene that is suitable for HPV6 whole-genome-based phylogenetic analysis. This 
study complements and significantly expands the current knowledge of HPV6 genetic
diversity and forms a comprehensive basis for future epidemiological,
evolutionary, functional, pathogenicity, vaccination, and molecular assay
development studies.

Copyright © 2014, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.00621-14 
PMCID: PMC4054425
PMID: 24741079  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
