

1919. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2017 Nov 15;99(4):921-928. doi:
10.1016/j.ijrobp.2017.06.002. Epub 2017 Jun 15.

Computed Tomography Radiomics Predicts HPV Status and Local Tumor Control After
Definitive Radiochemotherapy in Head and Neck Squamous Cell Carcinoma.

Bogowicz M(1), Riesterer O(2), Ikenberg K(3), Stieb S(2), Moch H(3), Studer G(2),
Guckenberger M(2), Tanadini-Lang S(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, University Hospital Zurich and University of
Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland. Electronic address: marta.nesteruk@usz.ch.
(2)Department of Radiation Oncology, University Hospital Zurich and University of
Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.
(3)Department of Pathology and Molecular Pathology, University Hospital Zurich
and University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.

PURPOSE: This study aimed to predict local tumor control (LC) after
radiochemotherapy of head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) and human
papillomavirus (HPV) status using computed tomography (CT) radiomics.
METHODS AND MATERIALS: HNSCC patients treated with definitive radiochemotherapy
were included in the retrospective study approved by the local ethical commission
(93 and 56 patients in the training and validation cohorts, respectively). Three 
hundred seventeen CT radiomic features, including those based on shape,
intensity, texture, and wavelet transform, were calculated in the primary tumor
region. Cox and logistic regression models were built to predict LC and HPV
status, respectively. The best-performing features in the univariable analysis
were included in the multivariable analysis after the exclusion of redundant
features. The quality of the models was assessed using the concordance index (CI)
for modeling of LC and receiver operating characteristics area under the curve
(AUC) for HPV status prediction. The radiomics LC model was compared to a model
incorporating clinical parameters (tumor stage, volume, and HPV status) and a
mixed model.
RESULTS: A radiomic signature comprising 3 features was significantly associated 
with LC (CItraining = 0.75 and CIvalidation = 0.78), showing that tumors with a
more heterogeneous CT density distribution are at risk for decreased LC. The
addition of clinical parameters to the radiomics model slightly improved the
model in the training cohort but not in the validation cohort. Another radiomic
signature showed good performance in HPV status prediction (AUCtraining = 0.85
and AUCvalidation = 0.78) and indicated that HPV-positive tumors have a more
homogenous CT density distribution.
CONCLUSIONS: Heterogeneity of HNSCC tumor density, quantified by CT radiomics, is
associated with LC after radiochemotherapy and HPV status.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijrobp.2017.06.002 
PMID: 28807534  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
