
Conflict of interest statement: The authors have nothing to disclose.


1934. Int J Cancer. 2017 Dec 1;141(11):2348-2358. doi: 10.1002/ijc.30929. Epub 2017 Aug
26.

Blockade of transforming growth factor-β signaling enhances oncolytic herpes
simplex virus efficacy in patient-derived recurrent glioblastoma models.

Esaki S(1)(2), Nigim F(1), Moon E(1), Luk S(1), Kiyokawa J(1), Curry W Jr(1),
Cahill DP(1), Chi AS(3), Iafrate AJ(4), Martuza RL(1), Rabkin SD(1), Wakimoto
H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, MA.
(2)Department of Otolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, Nagoya City University
Graduate School of Medical Sciences and Medical School, Nagoya, Japan.
(3)Laura and Isaac Perlmutter Cancer Center, NYU Langone Medical Center, New
York, NY.
(4)Department of Pathology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, MA.

Despite the current standard of multimodal management, glioblastoma (GBM)
inevitably recurs and effective therapy is not available for recurrent disease. A
subset of tumor cells with stem-like properties, termed GBM stem-like cells
(GSCs), are considered to play a role in tumor relapse. Although oncolytic herpes
simplex virus (oHSV) is a promising therapeutic for GBM, its efficacy against
recurrent GBM is incompletely characterized. Transforming growth factor beta
(TGF-β) plays vital roles in maintaining GSC stemness and GBM pathogenesis. We
hypothesized that oHSV and TGF-β inhibitors would synergistically exert antitumor
effects for recurrent GBM. Here we established a panel of patient-derived
recurrent tumor models from GBMs that relapsed after postsurgical radiation and
chemotherapy, based on GSC-enriched tumor sphere cultures. These GSCs are
resistant to the standard-of-care temozolomide but susceptible to oHSVs G47Δ and 
MG18L. Inhibition of TGF-β receptor kinase with selective targeted small
molecules reduced clonogenic sphere formation in all tested recurrent GSCs. The
combination of oHSV and TGF-βR inhibitor was synergistic in killing recurrent
GSCs through, in part, an inhibitor-induced JNK-MAPK blockade and increase in
oHSV replication. In vivo, systemic treatment with TGF-βR inhibitor greatly
enhanced the antitumor effects of single intratumoral oHSV injections, resulting 
in cures in 60% of mice bearing orthotopic recurrent GBM. These results reveal a 
novel synergistic interaction of oHSV therapy and TGF-β signaling blockade, and
warrant further investigations aimed at clinical translation of this combination 
strategy for GBM patients.

© 2017 UICC.

DOI: 10.1002/ijc.30929 
PMCID: PMC5765440
PMID: 28801914  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
