

1961. Anticancer Res. 2013 Jun;33(6):2457-65.

Unexpected alteration of β-catenin and c-KIT expression by 5-FU and docetaxel in 
p16-positive squamous cell carcinoma compared to HPV-negative HNSCC cells in
vitro.

Umbreit C(1), Aderhold C, Faber A, Sommer JU, Sauter A, Hofheinz RD,
Stern-Sträter J, Hoermann K, Schultz JD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, Medical Faculty of
Mannheim, University of Heidelberg, Mannheim, Germany. claudia.umbreit@umm.de

BACKGROUND: Head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) is the sixth most
common type of cancer worldwide. In several tumour entities, the tyrosine kinase 
receptor c-KIT is associated with tumour transformation in the epithelial tissue 
in cases of aberrant expression. Furthermore, tumour development and
dissemination are a result of dysregulated cellular pathways such as the
WNT/β-catenin pathway. β-Catenin is a multifunctional protein within the
canonical WNT signalling pathway and a pivotal factor for the stabilization of
cell-cell interactions. In malignant tissues, β-catenin triggers tumour
proliferation and progression. The aim of this study is to investigate the
expression patterns of c-KIT and β-catenin in human papillomavirus-negative and
p16-positive SCC and to evaluate the chemosensitivity of the tumour cells to the 
chemotherapeutical agents docetaxel and 5-fluorouracil (5-FU).
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We incubated the tumour cell lines with docetaxel (5
μmol/ml) and 5-FU (1 μmol/ml) and detected β-catenin and c-KIT by
immunohistochemistry and enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) after 48, 72, 
120, 192 and 240 h.
RESULTS: We found a reliable trend towards decreased β-catenin expression levels 
in p16-positive and p16-negative tumour cell lines when incubated with docetaxel,
in addition to induced apoptotic effect. At best, 5-FU had a slight influence on 
the alteration of the expression of β-catenin. Dose escalation of docetaxel and
5-FU had no statistically significant effect on the expression of β-catenin or
c-KIT. In HPV-negative HNSCC, a reduced expression level of β-catenin and c-KIT
was detected in an incubation period-dependent manner. p16-transformed SCC
(CERV196) cells were characterized by a reduced susceptibility to docetaxel
induced alteration of β-catenin expression.
CONCLUSION: We were unable to confirm the clinically-substantiated increased
chemosensitivity of p16-positive tumour cells in vitro. Extended studies and
clinical trials are needed to investigate these findings further in
HPV-associated HNSCC.


PMID: 23749896  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
