

1974. J Med Case Rep. 2017 Oct 26;11(1):301. doi: 10.1186/s13256-017-1458-1.

Human immunodeficiency virus infection acquired through a traditional healer's
ritual: a case report.

Pallangyo P(1), Nicholaus P(2), Mayala H(2), Kabeho A(2), Nkinda A(2), Janabi
M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, Jakaya Kikwete Cardiac Institute, P.O
Box 65141, Dar es Salaam, Tanzania. pedro.pallangyo@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, Jakaya Kikwete Cardiac Institute, P.O
Box 65141, Dar es Salaam, Tanzania.

BACKGROUND: Globally, over 36 million people were infected with human
immunodeficiency virus by the end of 2015. The Sub-Saharan African region home to
less than one-fifth of the global population disproportionately harbors over
two-thirds of the total infections and related deaths. Residents of Sub-Saharan
Africa continue to face limited access to allopathic medicine and it is estimated
that over 80% of primary health care needs in the region are met through
traditional healing practices. It is known that some of these practices are
performed in groups and the use of unsterilized instruments is common thus
potentiating the transmission of human immunodeficiency virus.
CASE PRESENTATION: A 29-year-old business woman of African origin residing in
rural Tanzania presented at a screening event to confirm her human
immunodeficiency virus status. Her past medical history was unremarkable and so
were two past pregnancies. As per the antenatal clinic card for the second
pregnancy, her human immunodeficiency virus serostatus was negative. She reported
that she had been taken to a traditional healer to take an oath of remaining
faithful during her husband's absence. The oath involved cutting of the healer's 
skin followed by hers using the same instrument. Approximately 4 months following
this traditional ritual she developed a febrile illness accompanied by enlarged
lymph nodes of her neck. She was investigated for malaria, typhoid fever, and
urinary tract infection which were negative but she tested positive for human
immunodeficiency virus. Owing to her disbelief regarding the human
immunodeficiency virus status, she went to three other care and treatment clinics
and the results remained similar. She denied any history of transfusion or
extramarital affairs. She tested positive at the screening event and
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay for human immunodeficiency virus performed at
our institution was reactive. Tenofovir, lamivudine, and efavirenz antiretroviral
combination was initiated.
CONCLUSIONS: Persistence of cultural norms involving exposure of bodily fluids
and use of unsterilized instruments especially in the developing world remains a 
viable source of human immunodeficiency virus transmission especially in rural
areas.

DOI: 10.1186/s13256-017-1458-1 
PMCID: PMC5657111
PMID: 29070083  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
