

1976. PLoS One. 2018 Jul 11;13(7):e0200509. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0200509.
eCollection 2018.

Evaluation of pemetrexed and etoposide as therapeutic regimens for human
papillomavirus-positive oral and oropharyngeal cancer.

Kim YR(1), Lee B(2)(3), Byun MR(2)(3), Lee JK(2), Choi JW(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hemato-Oncology, Yuseong Sun Hospital, Daejeon, Republic of
Korea.
(2)Department of Pharmacology, College of Pharmacy, Kyung Hee University, Seoul, 
Republic of Korea.
(3)Department of Life and Nanopharmaceutical Sciences, Kyung Hee University,
Seoul, Republic of Korea.

Although human papillomavirus (HPV) positive oral and oropharyngeal cancers have 
distinct epidemiologic and molecular characteristics compared to HPV-negative
cancers, all patients with oral and oropharyngeal cancers received same standard 
regimen regardless of HPV status. For these reasons, specific regimens for
patients with HPV-positive oral and oropharyngeal cancer are needed.
Differentially expressed genes (DEG) between HPV-positive and HPV-negative
oropharyngeal cancers were re-analyzed and categorized from public database.
Then, druggable targets to HPV-positive oral and oropharyngeal cancer were
identified and were validated with E6/E7, which is oncogene of HPV, transfected
oral and oropharyngeal cancer cell lines and HPV infected cell lines. In DEG
analysis, HPV-positive oral and oropharyngeal cancer showed distinct disease
entity from HPV-negative cancers. Unlike HPV-negative oral and oropharyngeal
cancer, thymidylate synthase (TS) and topoisomerase II (Topo II) were
overexpressed in HPV-positive cancers. Transfection of Lenti-virus containing E6/
E7 to HPV-negative oral and oropharyngeal cancer cells induced upregulation of TS
and Topo II in those cells. Although cisplatin, which is standard regimen in head
and neck cancers, showed more effectiveness in HPV-negative cells, 5-FU and
pemetrexed, which are TS inhibitors, or etoposide, which is Topo II inhibitors,
worked more effectively in HPV-positive cells. In addition, cisplatin/etoposide
and cisplatin/pemetrexed combination regimens showed synergic effects in
HPV-positive cells. Pemetrexed or etoposide alone, or in combination with other
chemotherapeutic agents such as cisplatin, can be used as novel substitutes in a 
regimen of concurrent chemoradiotherapy or a palliative regimen for HPV-positive 
oral and oropharyngeal cancer patients. However, a well-designed clinical trial
is needed.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0200509 
PMCID: PMC6040768
PMID: 29995943  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
