

1991. Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol. 2012 May;121(5):291-5.

Recurrent posttransplant lymphoproliferative disorder involving the larynx and
trachea: case report and review of the literature.

Banks CA(1), Meier JD, Stallworth CR, White DR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Medical University of
South Carolina, Charleston, South Carolina 29425, USA.

OBJECTIVES: Posttransplant lymphoproliferative disorder (PTLD) is a
well-recognized complication of solid organ transplantation and commonly affects 
upper airway lymphoid tissue. Tracheal and laryngeal involvement in patients with
PTLD, however, is rare. We present one such case.
METHODS: We report the case of a patient with recurrent PTLD involving the larynx
and trachea and describe the presentation, evaluation, management, and outcome.
RESULTS: An 11-year-old boy who underwent bilateral nephrectomy and renal
transplantation as an infant was admitted to the hospital with chronic cough,
fever, stridor, and dyspnea. His post-transplantation course was complicated by
PTLD in cervical lymph nodes at 9 years of age that was successfully treated with
chemotherapy. A computed tomographic scan during his present admission revealed
supraglottic swelling, a distal tracheal mass, and paratracheal lymph node
enlargement. The patient underwent laryngoscopy and bronchoscopy with biopsy
specimens taken from the right laryngeal ventricle and distal trachea. Pathologic
examination yielded a diagnosis of Epstein-Barr virus-positive PTLD. The patient 
was treated with chemotherapy, which resulted in resolution of the airway
lesions, as seen on repeat bronchoscopy.
CONCLUSIONS: This is the first report, to our knowledge, of recurrent PTLD
involving simultaneous lesions in the larynx and the trachea. PTLD in the head
and neck can present as lymphoid hypertrophy, airway obstruction, stridor, or
cough. A high degree of clinical suspicion is essential for prompt diagnosis of
this life-threatening complication.

DOI: 10.1177/000348941212100502 
PMID: 22724273  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
