

1995. Oncol Rep. 2011 Nov;26(5):1099-109. doi: 10.3892/or.2011.1403. Epub 2011 Jul 26.

Chemotherapeutic alteration of VEGF-/PDGF- and PDGF-Rα/β expression by imatinib
in HPV-transformed squamous cell carcinoma compared to HPV-negative HNSCC in
vitro.

Schultz JD(1), Mühlheim K, Erben P, Hofheinz RD, Faber A, Thorn C, Sommer JU,
Hörmann K, Sauter A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, Medical Faculty of
Mannheim, University of Heidelberg, Mannheim, Germany. johannes.schultz@umm.de

Head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) is an aggressive epithelial
malignancy known to be the most common neoplasm appearing in the upper
aerodigestive tract. The poor five-year survival rate has remained unchanged in
the last decades despite the emergence of improved techniques in surgery,
radiation and chemotherapy. In the last 20 years awareness of a subset of
squamous cell carcinomas induced by oncogenic forms of the human papilloma virus 
(HPV) (high-risk types 16 and 18) has increased. The incidence of HPV-associated 
oropharyngeal cancer is rising, indicating the increased importance of the viral 
etiology. Cell proliferation, migration, induction of tumor vascularization and
carcinogenesis, as well as invasion facilitation is regulated by a variety of
angiogenic peptides like PDGF, PDGF-R and VEGF. They might be an encouraging
target for biological anticancer therapy by inhibiting disrupted cellular
signaling pathways. Imatinib has been shown to target specific tyrosine kinases, 
inhibiting proliferation in various cancer entities. The purpose of this study
was to evaluate the expression pattern of angiogenic factors (VEGF, PDGF and
PDGF-R) in HPV-positive (p16-CERV196 SCC) and (-negative squamous cell carcinoma 
(HNSCC). The study also evaluated the vulnerability of anti-angiogenesis therapy 
depending on the HPV status as potential treatment modality compared to
established platinum-based chemotherapeutic drugs. The different squamous tumor
cell lines were incubated with increasing concentrations of carboplatin (3 and
7.5 µmol) and imatinib (18 and 30 µmol). ELISA immunohistochemical methods were
carried out after 48, 72, 120, 192 and 240 h. We demonstrated a significant
reduction of VEGF and PDGF-Rα/β expression patterns after incubation of imatinib 
in ELISA and immunohistochemical methods, irrespective of the HPV status of the
tumor cells, whereas the application of carboplatin had no impact on the
expression of angiogenic peptides. Viral oncogen-transformed squamous cell
carcinoma (CERV196) cells were characterized by a reduced susceptibility for an
imatinib-altered VEGF expression. Further studies are planned to investigate this
observance in HPV-positive HNSCC in vitro. The implementation of a selective
molecular anti-angiogenic therapy in established chemotherapeutic regimens may
enhance the efficacy of platinum-based chemotherapy without an increased toxicity
profile and could thus improve the clinical outcome in HNSCC, irrespective of the
HPV status.

DOI: 10.3892/or.2011.1403 
PMID: 21805039  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
