

2004. Eur J Cancer. 2014 Apr;50(6):1100-11. doi: 10.1016/j.ejca.2013.12.018. Epub 2014 
Jan 11.

Oropharyngeal cancers: relationship between epidermal growth factor receptor
alterations and human papillomavirus status.

Mirghani H(1), Amen F(2), Moreau F(3), Guigay J(4), Hartl DM(5), Lacau St Guily
J(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Head and Neck Surgery, Institut de Cancérologie Gustave Roussy, 
Villejuif, France. Electronic address: haitham.mirghani@gustaveroussy.fr.
(2)Department of Head and Neck Surgery, Institut de Cancérologie Gustave Roussy, 
Villejuif, France. Electronic address: furratamen@gmail.com.
(3)Department of Virology, Faculty of Medicine University Pierre et Marie Curie
Paris VI and Hospital Tenon Assistance Publique Hôpitaux de Paris, France.
Electronic address: Frederiquemoreau@gmail.com.
(4)Department of Medical Oncology, Institut de Cancérologie Gustave Roussy,
Villejuif, France. Electronic address: Guiguay.joel@gustaveroussy.fr.
(5)Department of Head and Neck Surgery, Institut de Cancérologie Gustave Roussy, 
Villejuif, France. Electronic address: Dana.hartl@gustaveroussy.fr.
(6)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Faculty of Medicine
University Pierre et Marie Curie Paris VI and Hospital Tenon Assistance Publique 
Hôpitaux de Paris, France. Electronic address: jean.lacau@tnn.aphp.fr.

High-risk human papillomavirus (HR-HPV), particularly type 16, is now recognised 
as a causative agent in a subset of oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinomas
(OPSCCs). These tumours are on the increase and generally have a better prognosis
than their HPV negative counterparts. This raises the question of de escalation
therapy to reduce long term consequences in a younger cohort of patients with a
long life expectancy. Several clinical trials with anti-epidermal growth factor
receptor (EGFR) therapies, particularly cetuximab, are ongoing. Few data exist on
the relationship between EGFR and HPV induced oropharyngeal cancers. We summarise
the main studies in relation to EGFR alterations (gene copy number, protein
expression and mutations) and the impact on prognosis of HPV positive tumours
that express high levels of EGFR. We also discuss the opportunity of targeting
this pathway in light of recent studies.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejca.2013.12.018 
PMID: 24424107  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
