

2005. Cell Death Dis. 2014 Oct 23;5:e1489. doi: 10.1038/cddis.2014.455.

Bortezomib sensitises TRAIL-resistant HPV-positive head and neck cancer cells to 
TRAIL through a caspase-dependent, E6-independent mechanism.

Bullenkamp J(1), Raulf N(1), Ayaz B(2), Walczak H(3), Kulms D(4), Odell E(2),
Thavaraj S(2), Tavassoli M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Oncology, King's College London, Guy's Campus, Hodgkin
Building, London SE1 1UL, UK.
(2)Department of Oral Pathology, King's College London, Guy's Campus, Dental
Institute, London SE1 9RT, UK.
(3)Centre for Cell Death, Cancer and Inflammation (CCCI), UCL Cancer Institute,
72 Huntley Street, London WC1E 6BT, UK.
(4)Experimental Dermatology, Department of Dermatology, TU Dresden, Dresden
01307, Germany.

Human papillomavirus (HPV) is causative for a new and increasing form of head and
neck squamous cell carcinomas (HNSCCs). Although localised HPV-positive cancers
have a favourable response to radio-chemotherapy (RT/CT), the impact of HPV in
advanced or metastatic HNSCC remains to be defined and targeted therapeutics need
to be tested for cancers resistant to RT/CT. To this end, we investigated the
sensitivity of HPV-positive and -negative HNSCC cell lines to TRAIL (tumour
necrosis factor-related apoptosis-inducing ligand), which induces tumour
cell-specific apoptosis in various cancer types. A clear correlation was observed
between HPV positivity and resistance to TRAIL compared with HPV-negative head
and neck cancer cell lines. All TRAIL-resistant HPV-positive cell lines tested
were sensitised to TRAIL-induced cell death by treatment with bortezomib, a
clinically approved proteasome inhibitor. Bortezomib-mediated sensitisation to
TRAIL was associated with enhanced activation of caspase-8, -9 and -3, elevated
membrane expression levels of TRAIL-R2, cytochrome c release and G2/M arrest.
Knockdown of caspase-8 significantly blocked cell death induced by the
combination therapy, whereas the BH3-only protein Bid was not required for
induction of apoptosis. XIAP depletion increased the sensitivity of both
HPV-positive and -negative cells to TRAIL alone or in combination with
bortezomib. In contrast, restoration of p53 following E6 knockdown in
HPV-positive cells had no effect on their sensitivity to either single or
combination therapy, suggesting a p53-independent pathway for the observed
response. In summary, bortezomib-mediated proteasome inhibition sensitises
previously resistant HPV-positive HNSCC cells to TRAIL-induced cell death through
a mechanism involving both the extrinsic and intrinsic pathways of apoptosis. The
cooperative effect of these two targeted anticancer agents therefore represents a
promising treatment strategy for RT/CT-resistant HPV-associated head and neck
cancers.

DOI: 10.1038/cddis.2014.455 
PMCID: PMC4649534
PMID: 25341043  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
