

2020. Pathol Res Pract. 2012 Jan 15;208(1):1-8. doi: 10.1016/j.prp.2011.10.009. Epub
2011 Dec 7.

Morphology, DNA ploidy and HPV in lung cancer and head and neck cancer.

Kotb WF(1), Petersen I.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, Charité Campus Mitte, Berlin, Germany.

Lung cancer and head and neck cancer have similar genotoxic risk factors. While
the vast majority of lung cancers are caused by cigarette smoking alone, smoking 
together with heavy drinking are the major etiological agents of head and neck
cancer. In addition, human papilloma virus (HPV) has been identified as an
important causative factor of tonsillar carcinomas. In contrast, chromosomal
instability and aneuploidy identifiable by DNA measurement are predominately
associated with cancer progression. This selective review summarizes our studies 
that aimed to gain a better understanding of the biology and pathology of lung
cancer and head and neck cancer. In particular, it was attempted (a) to develop a
microscopy-based tumor classification system that provides insight into the
genetics of cancer cells and in particular their DNA ploidy, (b) to apply this
classification system to lung cancer and head and neck cancer and to correlate it
with clinicopathological parameters and molecular biomarkers, and (c) to analyze 
molecular characteristics and in particular the presence of human papilloma virus
in lung cancer and head and neck cancer. Therefore, we developed a core
classification based on the semi-quantitative assessment of the size and type of 
tumor cell nuclei and mitoses. It was found that (1) nuclear and mitosis size
correlated with the DNA content of the tumor cells, (2) tripolar mitoses were
indicative of cancer with near-triploid DNA content, (3) morphological and DNA
parameters indicating variability of the cancer genome were associated with poor 
prognosis of lung cancer patients, (4) HPV-positive head and neck squamous cell
carcinomas were characterized by smaller tumor nuclei and reduced DNA amount
compared to HPV-negative carcinomas, and (5) HPV is associated with lung cancer
in certain geographical regions of the world.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.prp.2011.10.009 
PMID: 22154608  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
