

2023. Curr Opin Oncol. 2010 May;22(3):206-11. doi: 10.1097/CCO.0b013e328338475c.

Challenges of integrating chemotherapy and targeted therapy with radiation in
locally advanced head and neck squamous cell cancer.

Marur S(1), Forastiere AA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, The Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center at Johns
Hopkins, Baltimore, Maryland 21231-1000, USA. smarur1@jhmi.edu

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: The curative treatment of locally advanced head and neck
squamous cell cancer has advanced greatly in recent years, with the establishment
of standard of care indications for chemoradiation (CRT). At the same time, there
have been advances in each modality, including intensity-modulated radiation
therapy, sequential chemotherapy and more tailored combination therapies.
However, with new therapies come new challenges. This review will discuss some of
the novel approaches to treating head and neck squamous cell cancer, particularly
the introduction of biological agents into treatment paradigms, and some of the
challenges arising as the field advances.
RECENT FINDINGS: A number of recent clinical trials have focused on reducing the 
disadvantages of concurrent CRT, specifically acute toxicity, lack of compliance 
and potential for late effects affecting quality of life and function. In
particular, the use of biological agents as radiosensitizers has led to the
investigation of new combination therapies, such as epidermal growth factor
receptor inhibitors administered concurrently with CRT. These new therapies have 
potential for improving overall survival and lowering locoregional recurrence
rates.
SUMMARY: Combination therapies hold promise for improving outcomes of patients
with head and neck squamous cell cancer, both human papilloma virus-associated
and human papilloma virus-negative tumors. The introduction of intensity
modulated radiation therapy and biological agents into CRT treatment approaches
may reduce some of the disadvantages of more traditional radiation and CRT
treatments. Although many challenges remain, the possibility of improving
survival with reduced toxicity through treatment selection based on risk
stratification and prognostic biomarkers is incrementally evolving.

DOI: 10.1097/CCO.0b013e328338475c 
PMID: 20216313  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
