

2029. Am J Pathol. 2015 Mar;185(3):679-92. doi: 10.1016/j.ajpath.2014.11.018. Epub 2015
Jan 5.

Identification of a human papillomavirus-associated oncogenic miRNA panel in
human oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma validated by bioinformatics analysis 
of the Cancer Genome Atlas.

Miller DL(1), Davis JW(2), Taylor KH(1), Johnson J(3), Shi Z(3), Williams R(4),
Atasoy U(5), Lewis JS Jr(6), Stack MS(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Anatomical Sciences, University of Missouri School
of Medicine, Columbia, Missouri.
(2)Department of Health Management and Informatics, University of Missouri School
of Medicine, Columbia, Missouri; Department of Statistics, University of Missouri
School of Medicine, Columbia, Missouri.
(3)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of Notre Dame, South
Bend, Indiana; Harper Cancer Research Institute, University of Notre Dame, South 
Bend, Indiana.
(4)Department of Biochemistry, Indiana University South Bend, South Bend,
Indiana.
(5)Department of Surgery, University of Missouri School of Medicine, Columbia,
Missouri.
(6)Department of Pathology and Immunology, Washington University School of
Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri; Department of Otolaryngology Head and Neck
Surgery, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri.
(7)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of Notre Dame, South
Bend, Indiana; Harper Cancer Research Institute, University of Notre Dame, South 
Bend, Indiana. Electronic address: sstack@nd.edu.

High-risk human papillomavirus (HPV) is a causative agent for an increasing
subset of oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinomas (OPSCCs), and current evidence
supports these tumors as having identifiable risk factors and improved response
to therapy. However, the biochemical and molecular alterations underlying the
pathobiology of HPV-associated OPSCC (designated HPV(+) OPSCC) remain unclear.
Herein, we profile miRNA expression patterns in HPV(+) OPSCC to provide a more
detailed understanding of pathologic molecular events and to identify biomarkers 
that may have applicability for early diagnosis, improved staging, and prognostic
stratification. Differentially expressed miRNAs were identified in RNA isolated
from an initial clinical cohort of HPV(+/-) OPSCC tumors by quantitative
PCR-based miRNA profiling. This oncogenic miRNA panel was validated using miRNA
sequencing and clinical data from The Cancer Genome Atlas and miRNA in situ
hybridization. The HPV-associated oncogenic miRNA panel has potential utility in 
diagnosis and disease stratification and in mechanistic elucidation of molecular 
factors that contribute to OPSCC development, progression, and differential
response to therapy.

Copyright © 2015 American Society for Investigative Pathology. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajpath.2014.11.018 
PMCID: PMC4348472
PMID: 25572154  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
