

2033. Zhonghua Er Ke Za Zhi. 2012 Apr;50(4):255-60.

[Evolution and prognosis of the acute flaccid paralysis associated with
enterovirus 71 infection evaluated through a clinical and magnetic resonance
imaging follow-up study].

[Article in Chinese]

Peng BW(1), Du ZH, Li XJ, Lin HS, Liu HS, Chen WX, Mai JN, Liang HC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Guangzhou Women and Children's Medical Center,
Guangzhou 510120, China.

OBJECTIVE: To explore the development and prognosis of the acute flaccid
paralysis (AFP) associated with enterovirus 71 (EV71) infection through clinical 
follow-up study for clinical and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) features based 
on the research progress of virology and pathology.
METHOD: Sixteen children with HFMD associated with AFP in hospital from May 1,
2011 to August 31, 2011 were investigated and the patients received intensive
rehabilitation training. The 16 cases were divided into two groups (the recovery 
or the sequela) by if the muscle strength recovered to level 4 after intensive
rehabilitation. The MRI findings of 15 children were analyzed and among them, 6
patients were reexamined after one month. The clinical markers were compared
between groups including course of disease, WBC, WBC in cerebrospinal fluid
(CSF), ventilator support, therapy, the worst muscle strength, the initial tendon
reflex, the muscle atrophy, and multi-limb paralysis. The data were analyzed by t
test and χ2 test with SPSS10.0.
RESULT: All the 16 children were infected with enterovirus 71 (EV71). The
myodynamia of 7 children were level 0, 4 children had serious upper limbs
paralysis. The neck muscle in 3 cases and the brain stem motor ruckus in 4 cases 
were involved. The ankle clonus of non-completely paralyzed limbs in 14 cases
occurred during rehabilitation. Eight children had the better prognosis, the
other 8 children had sequela. 0 level muscle strength (0 case vs. 7 cases,
χ2=12.4), the initial tendon reflex (2 cases vs. 8 cases, χ2=9.6), obvious muscle
atrophy (0 case vs. 8 cases, χ2=16), were significantly different in the children
with the recovery when compared to the sequela (P<0.01). The severe upper limbs
paralysis had the worse prognosis than the severe lower limbs paralysis. MR
imaging showed signs of spinal nerve root inflammation and the bilateral
hyperintense lesions, symmetrical in the posterior portions of the medulla, pons,
and asymmetrical in the ventral horns of cervical spinal cord. Signal enhancement
occurred only in the early MRI examination.
CONCLUSION: In the evolution of AFP due to EV71 infection, the upper motor neuron
damage is common, the prognosis is related with the severity of early paralysis
and neuron damage. MR imaging is helpful to understand the pathological mechanism
of AFP.


PMID: 22801224  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
