
Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.


2045. Curr Treat Options Oncol. 2012 Mar;13(1):35-46. doi: 10.1007/s11864-011-0176-y.

Current treatment options for metastatic head and neck cancer.

Price KA(1), Cohen EE.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Medical Oncology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN 55905, USA.
price.katharine@mayo.edu

Head and neck squamous cell carcinoma is now the 8th most common cancer affecting
men in the United States largely due to a rising epidemic of oropharynx cancer
(tonsil and tongue base) associated with the human papillomavirus (HPV). The
median overall survival for recurrent or metastatic head and neck cancer (R/M
HNSCC) remains less than 1 year despite modern chemotherapy and targeted agents. 
Palliative chemotherapy and the epidermal growth factor receptor inhibitor,
cetuximab, constitute the backbone of treatment for patients with R/M HNSCC.
Platinum doublets studied in phase III trials include cisplatin/5-FU,
cisplatin/paclitaxel, and cisplatin/pemetrexed. Platinum chemotherapy in
combination with 5-fluorouracil and cetuximab has resulted in the longest median 
overall survival. Combination platinum regimens increase response rates and
toxicity but not survival and should be reserved for patients who are symptomatic
from their disease for whom the benefit of a partial response may be worth the
cost of increased treatment-related side effects. For many patients who are
asymptomatic with a low disease burden, single agent regimens are appropriate to 
balance treatment with side effects. Drugs commonly used as single agents in the 
treatment of R/M HNSCC include docetaxel, paclitaxel, cetuximab, capecitabine,
pemetrexed, and methotrexate. Best supportive care alone is often appropriate for
poor performance status patients. Palliative radiation therapy is beneficial for 
treating symptomatic metastatic sites. Aggressive symptom management is
imperative for all patients and often should include referral to experts in
palliative care and pain management. New therapies currently under investigation 
include mTOR inhibitors, anti-angiogenic agents, and IGF1R inhibitors. Given the 
poor prognosis for most patients with R/M HNSCC, enrollment in clinical trials
investigating novel approaches to therapy should be encouraged.

DOI: 10.1007/s11864-011-0176-y 
PMID: 22252884  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
