

2046. J Laryngol Otol. 2016 May;130(S2):S90-S96.

Oropharyngeal cancer: United Kingdom National Multidisciplinary Guidelines.

Mehanna H(1), Evans M(2), Beasley M(3), Chatterjee S(4), Dilkes M(5), Homer J(6),
O'Hara J(7), Robinson M(8), Shaw R(9), Sloan P(10).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Head and Neck Studies and Education,University of
Birmingham,Birmingham,UK.
(2)Velindre Cancer Centre,Cardiff,UK.
(3)Bristol Haematology and Oncology Centre,University Hospitals Bristol NHS
Foundation Trust,Bristol,UK.
(4)Tata Medical Center,Kolkata,India;Newcastle University,Newcastle upon Tyne,UK.
(5)ENT Department,Barts and The London NHS Trust,London,UK.
(6)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery,Manchester Royal Infirmary 
and Christie Hospital,University of Manchester,Manchester,UK.
(7)Department of Otolaryngology,The Newcastle upon Tyne Hospitals NHS Foundation 
Trust,Newcastle upon Tyne,UK.
(8)School of Dental Sciences, Newcastle University,Newcastle upon Tyne,UK.
(9)Department of Molecular and Clinical Cancer Medicine,Liverpool CR-UK
Centre,Institute of Translational Medicine,University of Liverpool,Aintree
University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust,Liverpool,UK.
(10)Department of Cellular Pathology,The Newcastle upon Tyne Hospitals NHS
Foundation Trust,Oral Health Research Group,Newcastle University,Newcastle upon
Tyne,UK.

This is the official guideline endorsed by the specialty associations involved in
the care of head and neck cancer patients in the UK. There has been significant
debate in the management of oropharyngeal cancer in the last decade, especially
in light of the increased incidence, clarity on the role of the human papilloma
virus in this disease and the treatment responsiveness of the human papilloma
virus positive cancers. This paper discusses the evidence base pertaining to the 
management of oropharyngeal cancer and provides recommendations on management for
this group of patients receiving cancer care. Recommendations • Cross-sectional
imaging is required in all cases to complete assessment and staging. (R) •
Magnetic resonance imaging is recommended for primary site and computed
tomography scan for neck and chest. (R) • Positron emission tomography combined
with computed tomography scanning is recommended for the assessment of response
after chemoradiotherapy, and has a role in assessing recurrence. (R) •
Examination under anaesthetic is strongly recommended, but not mandatory. (R) •
Histological diagnosis is mandatory in most cases, especially for patients
receiving treatment with curative intent. (R) • Oropharyngeal carcinoma
histopathology reports should be prepared according to The Royal College of
Pathologists Guidelines. (G) • Human papilloma virus (HPV) testing should be
carried out for all oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinomas as recommended in The 
Royal College of Pathologists Guidelines. (R) • Human papilloma virus testing for
oropharyngeal cancer should be performed within a diagnostic service where the
laboratory procedures and reporting standards are quality assured. (G) •
Treatment options for T1-T2 N0 oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma include
radical radiotherapy or transoral surgery and neck dissection (with
post-operative (chemo)radiotherapy if there are adverse pathological features on 
histological examination). (R) • Transoral surgery is preferable to open
techniques and is associated with good functional outcomes in retrospective
series. (R) • If treated surgically, neck dissection should include levels II-IV 
and possibly level I. Level IIb can be omitted if there is no disease in level
IIa. (R) • If treated with radiotherapy, levels II-IV should be included, and
possibly level Ib in selected cases. (R) • Altering the modalities of treatment
according to HPV status is currently controversial and should be undertaken only 
in clinical trials. (R) • Where possible, patients should be offered the
opportunity to enrol in clinical trials in the field. (G).

DOI: 10.1017/S0022215116000505 
PMCID: PMC4873902
PMID: 27841123  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
