

2048. Anticancer Res. 2015 Apr;35(4):1843-9.

The expression of Toll-like receptors 2, 4, 5, 7 and 9 in Merkel cell carcinoma.

Jouhi L(1), Koljonen V(2), Böhling T(3), Haglund C(4), Hagström J(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology - Head and Neck Surgery, Helsinki University
Central Hospital, Helsinki, Finland.
(2)Department of Plastic Surgery, University of Helsinki and Helsinki University 
Hospital, Helsinki, Finland virve.koljonen@hus.fi.
(3)Department of Pathology, University of Helsinki and Helsinki University
Hospital, Helsinki, Finland.
(4)Department of Intestinal Surgery, University of Helsinki and Helsinki
University Hospital, Helsinki, Finland Research Programs Unit, Translational
Cancer Biology, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland.
(5)Department of Pathology, University of Helsinki and Helsinki University
Hospital, Helsinki, Finland Department of Oral Pathology, University of Helsinki,
Helsinki, Finland.

AIM: We sought to clarify whether the expression of toll-like receptors (TLR) in 
Merkel cell carcinoma (MCC) is linked to tumor and patient characteristics,
especially the presence of Merkel cell polyoma virus (MCV).
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The study comprised of 128 patients with data on Merkel
cell polyomavirus (MCV) status and clinical features were included in the study. 
Immunohistochemistry for TLR expression was performed on tissue microarray (TMA) 
slides.
RESULTS: TLR 2, 4, 5, 7 and 9 expression was noted in most of the tumor
specimens. Decreased expression of TLR 9 correlated strongly with MCV positivity.
Cytoplasmic TLR 2 expression correlated with small tumor size, while nuclear TLR 
2 and TLR 5 expressions with larger tumors. Increased nuclear TLR 4 expression
and decreased TLR 7 expression were associated with older age.
CONCLUSION: TLR 2, 4, 5, 7 and 9 appear to reflect certain clinicopathological
variables and prognostic markers of MCC tumors.

Copyright© 2015 International Institute of Anticancer Research (Dr. John G.
Delinassios), All rights reserved.


PMID: 25862837  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
