

2053. Cancer. 2013 Jan 1;119(1):72-80. doi: 10.1002/cncr.27696. Epub 2012 Jun 26.

A microRNA expression signature for the prognosis of oropharyngeal squamous cell 
carcinoma.

Gao G(1), Gay HA, Chernock RD, Zhang TR, Luo J, Thorstad WL, Lewis JS Jr, Wang X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, Washington University School of Medicine,
St. Louis, Missouri, USA.

BACKGROUND: Oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) rates have been
increasing significantly in recent years, despite a decreasing incidence of head 
and neck cancer in general. Oropharyngeal SCC has many characteristics that are
distinct from other head and neck cancers, and thus it is important to focus
specifically on cancers arising in this region, with the goal of improving
patient outcomes. One important goal is to identify those patients who are likely
to fail standard therapy and who could potentially benefit from alternative or
targeted treatments.
METHODS: In the current study, the prognostic value of microRNAs (miRNAs) was
evaluated in patients with oropharyngeal SCC. miRNAs are small, noncoding RNAs
that are master regulators of many important biological processes. In total, 150 
oropharyngeal tumors were analyzed using the recently developed quantitative
polymerase chain reaction-based method for miRNA expression profiling. In
addition, the expression of miRNAs was also compared with human papillomavirus
(HPV) transcriptional activities.
RESULTS: The current study identified 6 miRNAs that were found to be
significantly associated with cancer survival. A combined expression signature of
these miRNAs was prognostic of oropharyngeal SCC, independent of common clinical 
features or HPV status.
CONCLUSIONS: This new miRNA signature was experimentally validated in an
independent oropharyngeal SCC cohort. Furthermore, 5 HPV-related miRNAs were
identified, which may help to characterize HPV-induced cancers including both
oropharyngeal and cervical SCC.

Copyright © 2012 American Cancer Society.

DOI: 10.1002/cncr.27696 
PMCID: PMC3461127
PMID: 22736309  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
