

2056. Cancer Med. 2017 May;6(5):910-917. doi: 10.1002/cam4.1045. Epub 2017 Apr 4.

A systematic investigation of the association between HPV and the
clinicopathological parameters and prognosis of oral and oropharyngeal squamous
cell carcinomas.

Wang F(1), Zhang H(2), Xue Y(1), Wen J(2), Zhou J(3), Yang X(1), Wei J(1).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Military Stomatology & National Clinical Research
Center for Oral Diseases & Shaanxi Clinical Research Center for Oral Diseases,
Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, School of Stomatology, The Fourth
Military Medical University, Xi'an, China.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Military Stomatology & National Clinical Research
Center for Oral Diseases & Shaanxi Engineering Research Center for Dental
Materials and Advanced Manufacture, Department of Anesthesiology, School of
Stomatology, The Fourth Military Medical University, Xi'an, China.
(3)State Key Laboratory of Military Stomatology & National Clinical Research
Center for Oral Diseases & Shaanxi International Joint Research Center for Oral
Diseases, Department of Oral Histology and Pathology, The Fourth Military Medical
University, Xi'an, China.

Human papillomavirus (HPV), the causal factor of cervical cancers, was closely
linked to the etiology and prognosis of oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma
(OPSCC), but its role in oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC) was unclear. In
addition, few researches based on Chinese population were documented. Hence, we
sought to investigate the relationship of HPV marker P16 protein to the
clinicopathological parameters and survival of OPSCC and OSCC patients
systematically to assess the influence of ethnic, regional difference on HPV
susceptibility. Specimens from 93 OPSCC patients and 95 OSCC patients were recut,
and P16 immunohistochemistry (IHC) was performed. Moreover, survival analysis was
conducted to confirm the independent factors that influenced the prognosis. The
P16 results were positive in 25.8% and 9.5% of patients with OPSCC and OSCC,
respectively. The overall survival (OS) of HPV-positive OPSCC patients was
significantly longer than that of HPV-negative OPSCC patients (P = 0.004).
Conversely, statistical significance was not observed regarding the OS of OSCC
patients (P = 0.343). Cox regression analysis indicated that T stage and P16
status were independent factors that affected the prognosis of OPSCC patients,
and the smoking index influenced the prognosis of OSCC patients. Among OPSCC
patients who received radiochemotherapy (RCT), HPV-positive patients had a better
survival rate than their HPV-negative counterparts (P = 0.015). Conversely, no
significant difference was observed between HPV-positive and HPV-negative OSCC
patients who received RCT (P = 0.237). P16 is a credible surrogate by which to
define HPV status. HPV expression had a favorable effect on OPSCC patients as
opposed to their OSCC counterparts in this single center population-based study.

© 2017 The Authors. Cancer Medicine published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/cam4.1045 
PMCID: PMC5430083
PMID: 28378539  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
