

2058. Am Fam Physician. 2014 Mar 1;89(5):353-8.

Evaluation and management of neck masses in children.

Meier JD(1), Grimmer JF(1).

Author information: 
(1)University of Utah School of Medicine, Salt Lake City, UT, USA.

Neck masses in children usually fall into one of three categories: developmental,
inflammatory/reactive, or neoplastic. Common congenital developmental masses in
the neck include thyroglossal duct cysts, branchial cleft cysts, dermoid cysts,
vascular malformations, and hemangiomas. Inflammatory neck masses can be the
result of reactive lymphadenopathy, infectious lymphadenitis (viral,
staphylococcal, and mycobacterial infections; cat-scratch disease), or Kawasaki
disease. Common benign neoplastic lesions include pilomatrixomas, lipomas,
fibromas, neurofibromas, and salivary gland tumors. Although rare in children,
malignant lesions occurring in the neck include lymphoma, rhabdomyosarcoma,
thyroid carcinoma, and metastatic nasopharyngeal carcinoma. Workup for a neck
mass may include a complete blood count; purified protein derivative test for
tuberculosis; and measurement of titers for Epstein-Barr virus, cat-scratch
disease, cytomegalovirus, human immunodeficiency virus, and toxoplasmosis if the 
history raises suspicion for any of these conditions. Ultrasonography is the
preferred imaging study for a developmental or palpable mass. Computed tomography
with intravenous contrast media is recommended for evaluating a malignancy or a
suspected retropharyngeal or deep neck abscess. Congenital neck masses are
excised to prevent potential growth and secondary infection of the lesion.
Antibiotic therapy for suspected bacterial lymphadenitis should target
Staphylococcus aureus and group A streptococcus. Lack of response to initial
antibiotics should prompt consideration of intravenous antibiotic therapy,
referral for possible incision and drainage, or further workup. If malignancy is 
suspected (accompanying type B symptoms; hard, firm, or rubbery consistency;
fixed mass; supraclavicular mass; lymph node larger than 2 cm in diameter;
persistent enlargement for more than two weeks; no decrease in size after four to
six weeks; absence of inflammation; ulceration; failure to respond to antibiotic 
therapy; or a thyroid mass), the patient should be referred to a head and neck
surgeon for urgent evaluation and possible biopsy.


PMID: 24695506  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
