

2076. Am J Rhinol Allergy. 2014 Jan-Feb;28(1):50-3. doi: 10.2500/ajra.2014.28.3987.

Influenza vaccinations and chemosensory function.

Doty RL(1), Berman AH, Izhar M, Hamilton HB, Villano D, Vazquez BE, Warrum MN,
Mahbob M.

Author information: 
(1)Smell and Taste Center, Department of Otorhinolaryngology-Head and Neck
Surgery, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, USA.

BACKGROUND: Although influenza vaccines have saved millions of lives, some have
been associated with extremely rare adverse effects such as Guillain-Barré
syndrome, Bell's palsy, and optic neuritis. Despite the fact that olfactory loss 
after an influenza vaccination is noted in one case report, no quantitative
olfactory testing was performed. Hence, it is unclear whether, in fact, olfactory
dysfunction can be associated with such vaccinations. This study was designed to 
(1) identify patients from the University of Pennsylvania Smell and Taste Center 
who attributed their empirically determined chemosensory disturbances to
influenza vaccinations and (2) determine whether influenza vaccinations add to
the degree of olfactory or gustatory dysfunction due to other causes.
METHODS: A retrospective analysis of self-reported etiologies of 4554 consecutive
patients presenting to the University of Pennsylvania Smell and Taste Center with
complaints of chemosensory dysfunction was performed. Those who reported
dysfunction secondary to influenza vaccinations were identified. Additionally, in
a subset of 925 patients for whom detailed inoculation histories were available, 
it was determined whether the number of lifetime inoculations added to the
deficits due to other causes.
RESULTS: Nine of the 4554 patients (0.19%) attributed olfactory disturbances to
an influenza vaccination. None complained of taste dysfunction. All nine had
abnormally low scores on the University of Pennsylvania Smell Identification Test
(p < 0.001), with three being anosmic and six microsmic. Seven had elevated
phenyl ethyl alcohol detection thresholds (p < 0.05). Two cases exhibited
mild-to-moderate loss of whole mouth taste function. Of the 925 patients, no
association was evident between the number of lifetime vaccinations and the
chemosensory test scores. In accord with previous studies, age and sex were
significantly related to the test scores.
CONCLUSION: A very small percentage of the 4554 patients evaluated (0.19%)
attributed their chemosensory dysfunction to a prior influenza vaccination. No
influences of the number of lifetime influenza vaccinations on the test scores
were evident in the subset of 925 patients whose dysfunction was due to other
causes.

DOI: 10.2500/ajra.2014.28.3987 
PMID: 24717882  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
