

2087. Am J Rhinol Allergy. 2014 Jan-Feb;28(1):3-11. doi: 10.2500/ajra.2014.28.4001.

Bacteriophage reduces biofilm of Staphylococcus aureus ex vivo isolates from
chronic rhinosinusitis patients.

Drilling A(1), Morales S, Jardeleza C, Vreugde S, Speck P, Wormald PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery-Otolaryngology Head and Neck Surgery, The Queen
Elizabeth Hospital, Woodville South, South Australia, Australia.

BACKGROUND: Staphylococcus aureus is the most common organism in recalcitrant
chronic rhinosinusitis (CRS) and is often resistant to traditional antibiotic
therapy. Bacteriophages ("phages") are a potential candidate for a new, effective
therapy. For phages to be useful in the setting of CRS, two minimum requirements 
must be presented: (1) phages must be effective against S. aureus biofilms and
(2) phages must have a broad spectrum of activity. This study aimed to assess the
in vitro activity of a phage cocktail (CockTail of Staphylococcus aureus specific
bacteriophage [CT-SA]) against S. aureus biofilms and a broad panel of strains
isolated from patients with CRS.
METHODS: The study examined 66 clinical isolates (CIs) of S. aureus. All isolates
were tested for the susceptibility to phage lysis by spotting CT-SA onto
bacterial lawns. To measure its effect on S. aureus biofilms, a minimum biofilm
eradication concentration assay was used, using five S. aureus isolates. Biofilms
of these isolates were grown, treated with CT-SA for 48 hours, fluorescently
stained, and viewed using confocal scanning laser microscopy.
RESULTS: CT-SA lysed 62 of 66 (94%) CIs of S. aureus. CT-SA treatment yielded
significant reductions in biofilm mass for 4/5 CIs tested and for ATCC 25923.
Challenge of S. aureus with a single phage resulted in the emergence of
bacteriophage-insensitive mutants (BIM) with a frequency of 10(-7), and challenge
with CT-SA completely prevented their development.
CONCLUSION: This study indicates that phage cocktail CT-SA can effectively
eliminate S. aureus, in planktonic and biofilm forms, from the great majority of 
CIs from this hospital setting. In addition, its potential effect in preventing
the emergence of BIMs was also established. Thus, CT-SA has the potential to
treat S. aureus infection and biofilm in CRS patients.

DOI: 10.2500/ajra.2014.28.4001 
PMID: 24717868  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
