

2096. Mol Med. 2014 Aug 28;20:372-80. doi: 10.2119/molmed.2014.00098.

Decreased Langerhans cell responses to IL-36γ: altered innate immunity in
patients with recurrent respiratory papillomatosis.

DeVoti J(1), Hatam L(1), Lucs A(2), Afzal A(3), Abramson A(2), Steinberg B(4),
Bonagura V(5).

Author information: 
(1)Feinstein Institute for Medical Research, Manhasset, New York, United States
of America Division of Allergy and Immunology, Department of Pediatrics, Hofstra 
North Shore-LIJ School of Medicine, Great Neck, New York, United States of
America.
(2)Feinstein Institute for Medical Research, Manhasset, New York, United States
of America Department of Otolaryngology, Hofstra North Shore-LIJ School of
Medicine, Great Neck, New York, United States of America.
(3)Elmezzi Graduate School of Molecular Medicine, Manhasset, New York, United
States of America.
(4)Elmezzi Graduate School of Molecular Medicine, Manhasset, New York, United
States of America Department of Otolaryngology, Hofstra North Shore-LIJ School of
Medicine, Great Neck, New York, United States of America.
(5)Feinstein Institute for Medical Research, Manhasset, New York, United States
of America Elmezzi Graduate School of Molecular Medicine, Manhasset, New York,
United States of America Division of Allergy and Immunology, Department of
Pediatrics, Hofstra North Shore-LIJ School of Medicine, Great Neck, New York,
United States of America.

Recurrent respiratory papillomatosis (RRP) is a rare, chronic disease caused by
human papillomaviruses (HPVs) types 6 and 11 that is characterized by the
polarization of adaptive immune responses that support persistent HPV infection. 
Respiratory papillomas express elevated mRNA levels of IL-36γ, a proinflammatory 
cytokine in comparison to autologous clinically normal laryngeal tissues; however
there is no evidence of inflammation in these lesions. Consistent with this,
respiratory papillomas do not contain TH1-like CD4(+) T-cells or cytotoxic CD8(+)
T-cells, but instead contain a predominance of TH2-like and T regulatory cells
(Tregs). In addition, papillomas also are infiltrated with immature Langerhans
cells (iLCs). In this study, we show that papilloma cells express IL-36γ protein,
and that human keratinocytes transduced with HPV11 have reduced IL-36γ secretion.
We now provide the first evidence that peripheral blood-derived iLCs respond to
IL-36γ by expressing inflammatory cytokines and chemokines. When stimulated with 
IL-36γ, iLCs from patients with RRP had lower expression levels of the TH2-like
chemokine CCL-20 as compared with controls. Patients' iLCs also had decreased
steady state levels of CCL-1, which is a proinflammatory chemokine. Moreover,
CCL-1 levels in iLCs inversely correlated with the severity of RRP. The combined 
decrease of TH1- and a TH2-like chemokines by iLCs from patients could have
consequences in the priming of IFN-γ expression by CD8(+) T-cells. Taken
together, our results suggest that, in RRP, there is a defect in the
proinflammatory innate immune responses made by iLCs in response to IL-36γ. The
consequence of this defect may lead to persistent HPV infection by failing to
support an effective HPV-specific, TH1-like and/or Tc1-like adaptive response,
thus resulting in the predominant TH2-like and/or Treg micromilieu present in
papillomas.

DOI: 10.2119/molmed.2014.00098 
PMCID: PMC4153838
PMID: 24950037  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
