

21. Oral Oncol. 2014 Jan;50(1):1-9. doi: 10.1016/j.oraloncology.2013.10.008. Epub
2013 Oct 26.

Human papilloma virus testing in oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma: what the 
clinician should know.

Mirghani H(1), Amen F(2), Moreau F(3), Guigay J(4), Ferchiou M(5), Melkane AE(6),
Hartl DM(7), Lacau St Guily J(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Head and Neck Surgery, Institut de Cancérologie Gustave Roussy, 
Villejuif, France. Electronic address: haitham.mirghani@gustaveroussy.fr.
(2)Department of Head and Neck Surgery, Institut de Cancérologie Gustave Roussy, 
Villejuif, France. Electronic address: furratamen@gmail.com.
(3)Department of Virology, Faculty of Medicine, University Pierre et Marie Curie 
Paris VI and Hospital Tenon Assistance Publique Hôpitaux de Paris, France.
Electronic address: Frederiquemoreau@gmail.com.
(4)Department of Medical Oncology, Institut de Cancérologie Gustave Roussy,
Villejuif, France. Electronic address: Joel.Guiguay@igr.fr.
(5)Department of Pathology, Institut de Cancérologie Gustave Roussy, Villejuif,
France. Electronic address: malek.ferchiou@igr.fr.
(6)Department of Head and Neck Surgery, Institut de Cancérologie Gustave Roussy, 
Villejuif, France. Electronic address: antoinemelkane@hotmail.com.
(7)Department of Head and Neck Surgery, Institut de Cancérologie Gustave Roussy, 
Villejuif, France. Electronic address: Dana.hartl@igr.fr.
(8)Department of Otolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, Faculty of Medicine,
University Pierre et Marie Curie Paris VI and Hospital Tenon Assistance Publique 
Hôpitaux de Paris, France. Electronic address: jean.lacau@tnn.aphp.fr.

High risk Human Papilloma virus (HR-HPV) associated oropharyngeal cancers are on 
the increase. Although, the scientific community is aware of the importance of
Human Papilloma Virus (HPV) testing, there is no consensus on the assays that are
required to reliably identify HR-HPV related tumors. A wide range of methods have
been developed. The most widely used techniques include viral DNA detection, with
polymerase chain reaction (PCR) or In Situ Hybridization, and p16 detected by
immunohistochemistry. However, these tests provide different information and have
their own specific limitations. In this review, we summarize these different
techniques, in light of the recent literature. p16 Overexpression, which is an
indirect marker of HPV infection, is considered by many head and neck oncologists
to be the most important marker for patient stratification. We describe the
frequent lack of concordance of this marker with other assays and the possible
reasons for this. The latest developments in HPV testing are also reported, such 
as the RNAscope™ HPV test, and how they fit into the existing framework of
techniques. HPV testing must not be considered in isolation, as there are
important interactions with other parameters, such as tobacco exposure. This is
an important and rapidly evolving field and is likely to become pivotal to
staging and choice of treatment of oropharyngeal carcinoma in the future.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.oraloncology.2013.10.008 
PMID: 24169585  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
