

2121. Pathologe. 2016 Jul;37(4):285-92. doi: 10.1007/s00292-016-0173-9.

[Grading of head and neck neoplasms].

[Article in German]

Agaimy A(1), Weichert W(2)(3)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Pathologisches Institut, Universitätsklinikum Erlangen, Krankenhausstrasse
8-10, 91054, Erlangen, Deutschland. abbas.agaimy@uk-erlangen.de.
(2)Institut für Pathologie, Technische Universität München, Ismaninger Straße 22,
81675, München, Deutschland. wilko.weichert@tum.de.
(3)Nationales Centrum für Tumorerkrankungen (NCT), Heidelberg, Deutschland.
wilko.weichert@tum.de.
(4)Deutsches Konsortium für Translationale Krebsforschung (DKTK), München,
Deutschland. wilko.weichert@tum.de.

Tumors of the head and neck form a heterogeneous group of benign and malignant
neoplasms with significant differences in biological behavior and therapeutic
strategies. Squamous cell carcinomas (SCC) of the larynx, pharynx and oral cavity
represent the most frequent and, thus, clinically most important malignant
neoplasms in this anatomical region. Similar to other neoplasms, grading of head 
and neck malignancies is based on evaluation of the tumor histology usually
including both architectural and cytological features; however, the current
consensus grading for head and neck SCC is of limited prognostic and therapeutic 
value and the reproducibility is low. Therefore, novel grading criteria have been
proposed that are based on additional parameters, such as the type of tumor
growth pattern at the invasive front (so-called tumor budding). These novel
algorithms, however, have not yet been officially endorsed into guidelines.
Salivary gland (SG) neoplasms, although less frequent, constitute a second
important pathologically and clinically complex group of tumors at this location.
In contrast to SCC, grading of these tumors is of high clinical importance. Based
on the large variety of carcinoma entities of the SG, both entity-specific (e. g.
mucoepidermoid carcinoma) algorithms but also algorithms, which are solely based 
on the recognition of a specific carcinoma variant with subsequent automatic
assignment of the tumor grade (e. g. acinic cell carcinoma and salivary duct
carcinoma) are in use. In the sinonasal tract, grading is important for
non-intestinal type adenocarcinoma and esthesioneuroblastoma. In this article the
most important grading schemes and criteria for head and neck malignancies are
presented and their prognostic and therapeutic implications are discussed.

DOI: 10.1007/s00292-016-0173-9 
PMID: 27342593  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
