

2128. J Virol. 2012 Aug;86(15):8131-8. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00408-12. Epub 2012 May 23.

The fanconi anemia pathway limits human papillomavirus replication.

Hoskins EE(1), Morreale RJ, Werner SP, Higginbotham JM, Laimins LA, Lambert PF,
Brown DR, Gillison ML, Nuovo GJ, Witte DP, Kim MO, Davies SM, Mehta PA, Butsch
Kovacic M, Wikenheiser-Brokamp KA, Wells SI.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Oncology, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center,
Department of Pediatrics, University of Cincinnati College of Medicine,
Cincinnati, Ohio, USA.

High-risk human papillomaviruses (HPVs) deregulate epidermal differentiation and 
cause anogenital and head and neck squamous cell carcinomas (SCCs). The E7 gene
is considered the predominant viral oncogene and drives proliferation and genome 
instability. While the implementation of routine screens has greatly reduced the 
incidence of cervical cancers which are almost exclusively HPV positive, the
proportion of HPV-positive head and neck SCCs is on the rise. High levels of HPV 
oncogene expression and genome load are linked to disease progression, but
genetic risk factors that regulate oncogene abundance and/or genome amplification
remain poorly understood. Fanconi anemia (FA) is a genome instability syndrome
characterized at least in part by extreme susceptibility to SCCs. FA results from
mutations in one of 15 genes in the FA pathway, whose protein products assemble
in the nucleus and play important roles in DNA damage repair. We report here that
loss of FA pathway components FANCA and FANCD2 stimulates E7 protein accumulation
in human keratinocytes and causes increased epithelial proliferation and basal
cell layer expansion in the HPV-positive epidermis. Additionally, FANCD2 loss
stimulates HPV genome amplification in differentiating cells, demonstrating that 
the intact FA pathway functions to restrict the HPV life cycle. These findings
raise the possibility that FA genes suppress HPV infection and disease and
suggest possible mechanism(s) for reported associations of HPV with an FA cohort 
in Brazil and for allelic variation of FA genes with HPV persistence in the
general population.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.00408-12 
PMCID: PMC3421690
PMID: 22623785  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
