

2132. Neoplasia. 2013 Jun;15(6):620-30.

Improved clearance during treatment of HPV-positive head and neck cancer through 
mTOR inhibition.

Coppock JD(1), Wieking BG, Molinolo AA, Gutkind JS, Miskimins WK, Lee JH.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Biology Research Center, Sanford Research/USD, Sioux Falls, SD, USA.

Human papillomavirus (HPV)-related head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) 
incidence is increasing at a near epidemic rate. We investigated whether the
mammalian (or mechanistic) target of rapamycin (mTOR) inhibitor, rapamycin, can
be used as a concurrent agent to standard-of-care cisplatin/radiation therapy
(CRT) to attenuate tumor lactate production, thus enhancing CRT-induced
immune-mediated clearance of this antigenic tumor type. A C57Bl/6-derived mouse
oropharyngeal epithelial cell line retrovirally transduced with HPV type 16 E6/E7
and human squamous cell carcinoma cell lines were evaluated for their response to
rapamycin in vitro with proliferation assays, Western blots, and lactate assays. 
Clonogenic assays and a preclinical mouse model were used to assess rapamycin as 
a concurrent agent to CRT. The potential of rapamycin to enhance immune response 
through lactate attenuation was assessed using quantitative tumor lactate
bioluminescence and assessment of cell-mediated immunity using E6/E7-vaccinated
mouse splenocytes. Rapamycin alone inhibited mTOR signaling of all cancer cell
lines tested in vitro and in vivo. Furthermore, rapamycin administered alone
significantly prolonged survival in vivo but did not result in any long-term
cures. Given concurrently, CRT/rapamycin significantly enhanced direct cell
killing in clonogenic assays and prolonged survival in immunocompromised mice.
However, in immunocompetent mice, concurrent CRT/rapamycin increased long-term
cures by 21%. Preliminary findings suggest that improved survival involves
increased cell killing and enhanced immune-mediated clearance in part due to
decreased lactate production. The results may provide rationale for the clinical 
evaluation of mTOR inhibitors concurrent with standard-of-care CRT for treatment 
of HPV-positive HNSCC.


PMCID: PMC3664994
PMID: 23730210  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
