

2135. J Med Case Rep. 2017 Feb 11;11(1):38. doi: 10.1186/s13256-017-1200-z.

Primary mediastinal large B cell lymphoma in a woman who is human
immunodeficiency virus positive presenting with superior vena cava syndrome: a
case report.

Pallangyo P(1), Nicholaus P(2), Lyimo F(3), Urio E(2), Kisenge P(2), Janabi M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, Jakaya Kikwete Cardiac Institute, P.O. 
Box 65141, Dar es Salaam, Tanzania. pedro.pallangyo@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, Jakaya Kikwete Cardiac Institute, P.O. 
Box 65141, Dar es Salaam, Tanzania.
(3)Department of Radiology, Muhimbili National Hospital, P.O. Box 65000, Dar es
Salaam, Tanzania.

BACKGROUND: The risk of non-Hodgkin lymphoma is increased 200-fold in individuals
seropositive for human immunodeficiency virus compared to those free from human
immunodeficiency virus. Human immunodeficiency virus-associated non-Hodgkin
lymphoma is known for its atypical presentation, aggressive ability, widespread
involvement, poor response to chemotherapy, and high relapse potential which
makes both the diagnosis and management a difficult undertaking especially in
resource-poor settings.
CASE PRESENTATION: We report a case of primary mediastinal large B cell lymphoma 
in a 46-year-old woman of African descent who is human immunodeficiency virus
positive who presented with symptoms of superior vena cava syndrome. Her past
medical history was remarkable for a 23-year history of systemic hypertension and
a 10-year history of human immunodeficiency virus infection. A physical
examination revealed an underweight woman with right-sided facial, neck, upper
limb, and trunk swelling together with distended veins on her chest and abdomen
draining downwards. A respiratory examination revealed a reduced chest expansion,
stony dull percussion note, and absent breath sounds on her entire right side
with a left-sided tracheal deviation. She had a CD4 count of 146 cells/μL. A
chest X-ray revealed a homogenous opacification on her right side with a
left-sided tracheal deviation while a computed tomography scan of her chest
revealed a solid mass on her right side. An echocardiogram showed a huge
well-circumscribed mass (4.6×3.3 cm) with spontaneous echocardiographic contrast 
compressing her heart inferiorly. She had severe pulmonary hypertension (right
ventricular systolic pressure 58 mmHg) but preserved left ventricular systolic
function, no thrombus was seen, and her pericardium was normal. A computed
tomography angiography of her aorta ruled out an aortic aneurysm. Finally, she
underwent mediastinoscopy and a direct biopsy of the mass was taken for
histopathology. Hematoxylin and eosin staining demonstrated a dense lymphoid
infiltrate of large malignant cells with pleomorphic nuclei in clusters,
compartmentalized by fine bands of fibrosis, and frequent mitoses were present. A
diagnosis of mediastinal large B cell lymphoma was reached.
CONCLUSIONS: The presence of a mediastinal widening coupled with a history of
unintentional yet significant weight loss in an individual who is human
immunodeficiency virus seropositive should raise an index of suspicion for
lymphomas and warrant aggressive investigations and timely management.

DOI: 10.1186/s13256-017-1200-z 
PMCID: PMC5303250
PMID: 28187791  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
