

2159. J Gene Med. 2010 Apr;12(4):365-76. doi: 10.1002/jgm.1447.

Adenovirus retargeting to surface expressed antigens on oral mucosa.

van Zeeburg HJ(1), van Beusechem VW, Huizenga A, Haisma HJ, Korokhov N, Gibbs S, 
Leemans CR, Brakenhoff RH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology/Head-Neck Surgery, Section Tumor Biology, VU
University Medical Centre, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: Head and neck squamous cell carcinomas develop in preneoplastic
mucosal fields that can extend over several centimeters in diameter. Most of
these fields are microscopically recognized as dysplasias. These fields are often
not adequately treated and might cause local relapse. Previous investigations
demonstrated that mouthwash therapy with oncolytic adenoviruses appears to be a
good option for the treatment of these fields, although, at present, with limited
efficacy.
METHODS: Immunohistochemistry on normal and preneoplastic mucosa was applied to
determine the expression levels of the coxsackie adenoviral receptor (CAR) and a 
few surface antigens that might allow retargeting: Ly-6D, CD44v6 and K928.
Monoclonal antibodies directed against these surface antigens were used for
retargeting of adenoviruses in model experiments with organotypic cultures of
mucosal epithelium. A bispecific single chain antibody was constructed against
both the adenoviral knob and Ly-6D.
RESULTS: Immunohistochemical staining revealed that CAR is present only at a low 
level in the basal layers of the oral mucosa of both normal and dysplastic
lesions. By contrast, Ly-6D, CD44v6 and K928 were abundantly expressed and Ly-6D 
even on the most superficial layers. Monoclonal antibodies against Ly-6D and
CD44v6 were shown to enhance infection in an organotypic cell culture by one log.
Based on these observations, we constructed a bispecific single chain antibody
against Ly-6D and adenovirus fiber knob, and showed that this engineered molecule
allows efficient CAR-independent infection.
CONCLUSIONS: Retargeting of oncolytic adenovirus to other surface molecules might
improve the efficacy of virotherapy of preneoplastic fields in the oral mucosa.

DOI: 10.1002/jgm.1447 
PMID: 20373331  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
