

2160. J Clin Virol. 2014 Sep;61(1):94-100. doi: 10.1016/j.jcv.2014.06.019. Epub 2014
Jun 30.

Variable expression of the forgotten oncogene E5 in HPV-positive oropharyngeal
cancer.

Um SH(1), Mundi N(1), Yoo J(2), Palma DA(3), Fung K(2), MacNeil D(2), Wehrli
B(4), Mymryk JS(5), Barrett JW(6), Nichols AC(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology Head & Neck Surgery, The University of Western
Ontario, London, Ontario, Canada.
(2)Department of Otolaryngology Head & Neck Surgery, The University of Western
Ontario, London, Ontario, Canada; London Regional Cancer Program, London,
Ontario, Canada; Department of Oncology, The University of Western Ontario,
London, Ontario, Canada.
(3)London Regional Cancer Program, London, Ontario, Canada; Lawson Health
Research Institute, London, Ontario, Canada; Department of Oncology, The
University of Western Ontario, London, Ontario, Canada.
(4)Department of Pathology, The University of Western Ontario, London, Ontario,
Canada.
(5)London Regional Cancer Program, London, Ontario, Canada; Lawson Health
Research Institute, London, Ontario, Canada; Department of Oncology, The
University of Western Ontario, London, Ontario, Canada; Department of
Microbiology and Immunology, The University of Western Ontario, London, Ontario, 
Canada.
(6)Department of Otolaryngology Head & Neck Surgery, The University of Western
Ontario, London, Ontario, Canada; London Regional Cancer Program, London,
Ontario, Canada; Lawson Health Research Institute, London, Ontario, Canada;
Department of Oncology, The University of Western Ontario, London, Ontario,
Canada.
(7)Department of Otolaryngology Head & Neck Surgery, The University of Western
Ontario, London, Ontario, Canada; London Regional Cancer Program, London,
Ontario, Canada; Lawson Health Research Institute, London, Ontario, Canada;
Department of Oncology, The University of Western Ontario, London, Ontario,
Canada; Department of Pathology, The University of Western Ontario, London,
Ontario, Canada. Electronic address: Anthony.Nichols@lhsc.on.ca.

BACKGROUND: The role of the HPV E6/E7 oncogenes in head and neck squamous cell
cancer (HNSCC) has been studied extensively, but the role of the viral E5 protein
remains poorly understood. Studies in cervical cancer indicate that E5 increases 
epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) recycling to the cell surface and
enhances growth factor signal transduction.
OBJECTIVE: This study was designed to examine the relationship between HPV E5,
EGFR, and survival in HPV-positive HNSCC.
STUDY DESIGN: A retrospective search of the London Health Sciences Centre
pathology database was performed to identify oropharyngeal cancer samples. HPV E5
and EGFR expression was measured by reverse transcriptase real-time PCR.
RESULTS: The majority of oropharyngeal tumor samples (59/82, 72%) were HPV-16
positive. Among the HPV-positive tumors, highly variable E5 expression was
detected from early polycistronic transcripts. Tumors with high E5 expression
levels had significantly higher EGFR levels (p=0.03). High E5 levels were
correlated with improved recurrence-free survival, but not overall survival
(p=0.02 and 0.71, respectively), whereas high EGFR was strongly associated with
decreased recurrence-free and overall survival (p<0.001 and 0.006 respectively). 
Multivariate analysis revealed E5 and EGFR to be the strongest predictors of
recurrence-free survival (p<0.01).
CONCLUSIONS: HPV E5-encoded transcripts are variably expressed in HPV-positive
HNSCC and this is correlated with EGFR expression in HPV-positive OPC. However,
E5 and EGFR independently predict recurrence-free survival in opposing manners.
These findings require further validation to determine if E5 and EGFR are useful 
biomarkers to stratify treatment intensity for patients with HPV-positive HNSCC.

Copyright © 2014. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jcv.2014.06.019 
PMID: 25027574  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
