

2163. Adv Med Sci. 2016 Sep;61(2):293-299. doi: 10.1016/j.advms.2016.03.009. Epub 2016 
Apr 1.

Cell-cycle gene expression analysis using real time PCR in locally advanced
squamous-cell head and neck cancer.

Woźniak G(1), Herok R(2), Jaksik R(3), Misiołek M(4), Kolebacz B(5),
Fiszer-Kierzkowska A(2), Miśkiewicz-Orczyk K(4), Szymczyk C(6), Maciejewski A(6),
Głowacki G(7), Suwiński R(8).

Author information: 
(1)Radiotherapy Department, Maria Sklodowska-Curie Memorial Cancer Center and
Institute of Oncology, Gliwice Branch, Gliwice, Poland. Electronic address:
gwozniak.md@gmail.com.
(2)Center for Translational Research and Molecular Biology of Cancer, Maria
Sklodowska-Curie Memorial Cancer Center and Institute of Oncology, Gliwice
Branch, Gliwice, Poland.
(3)Institute of Automatic Control, Silesian University of Technology, Gliwice,
Poland.
(4)Clinical Department of Otolaryngology in Zabrze, Medical University of
Silesia, Katowice, Poland.
(5)Department of Laryngology, Upper Silesian Medical Center, Katowice-Ochojec,
Poland.
(6)Clinic of Oncological and Reconstructive Surgery, Maria Sklodowska-Curie
Memorial Cancer Center and Institute of Oncology, Gliwice Branch, Gliwice,
Poland.
(7)Radiotherapy Department, Maria Sklodowska-Curie Memorial Cancer Center and
Institute of Oncology, Gliwice Branch, Gliwice, Poland.
(8)II Radiotherapy and Chemotherapy Clinic and Teaching Hospital, Maria
Sklodowska-Curie Memorial Cancer Center and Institute of Oncology, Gliwice
Branch, Gliwice, Poland.

PURPOSE: The analysis of gene expression, especially those involved in cell cycle
control, can help to discover mechanisms determining the outcome of radiation
treatment. The main purpose of this study was to examine the expression level of 
genes responsible for cell cycle regulation in samples of the head and neck
cancer, obtained during surgery.
METHODS: Postsurgical samples of SCC of head and neck region were collected. Over
80 genes were analysed using cell cycle quantitative real-time RT-PCR Array
method. Presence of 14 high-risk HPV types DNA in frozen or paraffin-embedded
tumour pathological samples was also assessed. To correlate gene expression with 
selected pathological features and clinical outcome we used different
hierarchical clustering method.
RESULTS: Hierarchical clustering demonstrated the association between gene
expression within certain clusters and gender, tumour site, T stage, N stage,
grade, pathological subtype or tumour recurrence.
CONCLUSIONS: Despite some limitations we were able to identify gene clusters that
allowed to classify patients according to selected clinical features and
occurrence of tumour recurrence. The results of the analysis also confirm that
the incidence of HPV infection among the patients from Upper Silesia is
relatively low, whereas HPV negative tumours, likely associated with smoking,
appeared dominant.

Copyright © 2016 Medical University of Bialystok. Published by Elsevier Urban &
Partner Sp. z o.o. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.advms.2016.03.009 
PMID: 27136187  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
