

2164. Transfus Apher Sci. 2010 Apr;42(2):131-9. doi: 10.1016/j.transci.2010.01.008.

Human immunodeficiency and Hodgkin lymphoma.

Sissolak G(1), Sissolak D, Jacobs P.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Clinical Haematology, Department of Internal Medicine, Faculty of 
Health Sciences, Stellenbosch University, Tygerberg Academic Hospital, South
Africa.

Presentation of Hodgkin lymphoma (HL) is distinctive in the infected individual
being more advanced, accompanied by B symptoms and the presence of extranodal
disease particularly lymphadenopathy of the head and neck. Bone marrow
involvement may be found in over 50% of cases. Virtually all co express
gamma-herpesvirus. Phenotypically there is prominence of the mixed-cellularity
and lymphocyte depleted histopathologic subtypes that define an aggressive
clinical course in comparison to other variants. Prior to the induction of cART, 
median survival was only 1-2 years. Notably the first chemotherapy trial using
ABVD (doxorubicin, bleomycin, vinblastine, and dacarbazine) in 21 patients,
without treating the viral infection, resulted in a 43% complete remission rate
accompanied by severe haematological toxicities but did not extend median
survival with this being 1.5 years matching the negative cases. Significant
change accompanied concomitant anti-retroviral therapy that could be given safely
even with dose intensive regimens exemplified by BEACOPP (bleomycin, etoposide,
doxorubicin, cyclophosphamide, vincristine, procarbazine, and prednisone) in 12
patients or the Stanford V regimen (doxorubicin, vinblastine, mechlorethamine,
etoposide, vincristine, bleomycin, prednisone) coupled with involved-field
radiation for bulky disease studied in 59 patients. BEACOPP extended overall
survival (OS) to 83% at 2 years. A similar trend was seen when using the Stanford
V regimen with an OS rate of 51% at 3 years, disease-free survival (DFS) of 68%
and freedom from progression (FFP) in 60%. Additional benefits accrued from
supportive care with stimulatory peptides such as G-CSF and when combined with
bacterial prophylaxis results approached that found in the uninfected reference
group. Current consensus holds this particular lymphoma as still among the
non-AIDS defining cancers being lung, stomach, liver or anal despite these having
recently gained more attention as several of these neoplasms may be occurring
more commonly in the era of cART. While the relative risk of developing a
non-AIDS-defining neoplasm in HIV-infected persons on the average is 2-3 times,
the risk for developing HL in HIV-infected cases impressively ranges between 5
and 25 times when compared to the general population. Based on the precedent in
which Kaposi sarcoma and the non-Hodgkin lymphomas distinctively alter the course
of this retroviral infection in a way indistinguishable from concurrent Hodgkin
lymphoma we propose that this entity be similarly regarded and the hypothesis
tested in large randomised prospective study.

(c) 2010. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.transci.2010.01.008 
PMID: 20138008  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
