
Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts of interest to
disclose.


2178. Laryngorhinootologie. 2011 Mar;90(3):168-77. doi: 10.1055/s-0030-1270472. Epub
2011 Mar 4.

[Innovations in biomarker development: a pathway towards individualized cancer
therapy?].

[Article in German]

Dumitru CA(1), Hoffmann TK, Lehnerdt G, Zeidler R, Lang S, Brandau S.

Author information: 
(1)Klinik für Hals-Nasen-Ohrenheilkunde, Universität Duisburg-Essen, Essen,
Germany.

Despite multiple medical and scientific achievements, cancer remains a leading
cause of death worldwide. Next to imaging technologies, molecular methods for
early detection and for monitoring of the course of disease are of increasing
interest. Thus, over the past years numerous studies have focused on the
identification of biomarkers for cancer diagnosis, prognosis and response to
therapy. The study of biomarkers seems to pose a high degree of complexity
because many different types of molecules may, in principle, serve as potential
biomarkers. In addition, these molecules can be produced either by the tumor or
by the tumor-host in response to the presence of cancer. In this review the
authors will address several major topics encompassed by the field of biomarker
research. They will discuss the primary sources from which biomarker candidates
can be 'mined' as well as the technological or methodological challenges
associated with identification of biomarkers. Furthermore, the review will focus 
on current biomarker candidates for head and neck squamous cell carcinoma
(HNSCC), with particular interest on several molecules yielding potential
relevance for detection and prognosis of this type of cancer. Finally, several
biomarker candidates with predictive potential for the response to therapy of
HNSCC patients will be discussed, since identifying such molecules is crucial for
developing individually-tailored and improved therapeutic strategies.

© Georg Thieme Verlag KG Stuttgart · New York.

DOI: 10.1055/s-0030-1270472 
PMID: 21380962  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
