

2194. Cancer Gene Ther. 2012 Feb;19(2):144-52. doi: 10.1038/cgt.2011.79. Epub 2011 Nov 
25.

E10A, an adenovirus-carrying endostatin gene, dramatically increased the tumor
drug concentration of metronomic chemotherapy with low-dose cisplatin in a
xenograft mouse model for head and neck squamous-cell carcinoma.

Adhim Z(1), Lin X, Huang W, Morishita N, Nakamura T, Yasui H, Otsuki N, Shigemura
K, Fujisawa M, Nibu K, Shirakawa T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Kobe University Graduate
School of Medicine, Chuo-ku, Kobe, Japan.

Most cancer chemotherapeutic agents are administered at the maximum-tolerated
dose (MTD) in short cycles with treatment breaks. However, MTD-based
chemotherapies are often associated with significant toxicity and treatment
breaks allow the opportunity for tumor regrowth and acquisition of
chemoresistance. To minimize these drawbacks, a metronomic strategy, in which
chemotherapeutics are administered at doses significantly below the MTD without
treatment breaks, has been suggested by many investigators. The antitumor effect 
of metronomic chemotherapy may be partially due to inhibition of tumor
angiogenesis, and it could be enhanced by a combination therapy, including
antiangiogenic agents. In this study, we evaluated the synergistic effect of
E10A, an adenovirus carrying the endostatin gene, the most potent inhibitors of
tumor angiogenesis, in combination with weekly low-dose cisplatin in a xenograft 
mouse model for head and neck squamous-cell carcinoma. The E10A induced mRNA and 
protein expressions of endostatin in H891 cells in vitro. E10A significantly
enhanced the in vivo tumor growth inhibitory effect of cisplatin.
Immunohistochemical analysis with a TUNEL (terminal deoxynucleotidyl
transferase-mediated nick-end labeling) assay and anti-CD31 antibodies revealed
that the combination of E10A and cisplatin induced high levels of cell apoptosis 
and inhibited tumor angiogenesis. Importantly, E10A increased the platinum
concentrations in tumors to fivefold higher than that induced by cisplatin alone.

DOI: 10.1038/cgt.2011.79 
PMID: 22116375  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
