

2204. Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol. 2012 Mar;108(3):182-7. doi:
10.1016/j.anai.2011.12.018. Epub 2012 Jan 26.

Effects of rhinovirus infection on the expression and function of cystic fibrosis
transmembrane conductance regulator and epithelial sodium channel in human nasal 
mucosa.

Kim JH(1), Kwon HJ, Jang YJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Chuncheon Sacred
Heart Hospital, Hallym University College of Medicine, Chuncheon, South Korea.

BACKGROUND: Changes in expression and function of the cystic fibrosis
transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) and epithelial sodium channel (ENaC)
have been found to cause airway surface liquid (ASL) derangement and to impair
mucociliary clearance, both of which have been linked to the pathogenesis of
rhinovirus (RV) infection.
OBJECTIVES: The effects of RV infection on the expression and function of CFTR
and ENaC in nasal epithelial cells were investigated.
METHODS: Nasal epithelial cells obtained from 14 turbinoplasty patients were
infected with RV serotype 16 (RV-16) for 4 hours. Expression of CFTR, α-ENaC,
β-ENaC, and γ-ENaC was determined by real-time polymerase chain reaction, Western
blot analysis, and confocal immunofluorescence microscopy. Functional changes in 
the CFTR and ENaC proteins were assessed by measuring transepithelial resistance 
(TER) using a voltmeter combined with ion channel modulators.
RESULTS: Rhinovirus infection increased expression of CFTR, α-ENaC, β-ENaC, and
γ-ENaC messenger RNA (mRNA) and protein compared with controls (P < .05 each) and
increased the expression of all 4 proteins on confocal immunofluorescence
microscopy. Treatment of cells with the ENaC blocker amiloride and the CFTR
activator forskolin increased TER in RV-infected cells, whereas forskolin
decreased TER in uninfected cells. The CFTR inhibitor NPPB, however, blocked CFTR
more in RV-infected than in noninfected cells.
CONCLUSIONS: Rhinovirus increased the expression of CFTR and appeared to alter
its function. In contrast, ENaC expression and function were increased by RV
infection. Therefore, RV infection may impair mucociliary transport of nasal
epithelium by these alterations.

Copyright © 2012 American College of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.anai.2011.12.018 
PMID: 22374202  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
