
Conflict of interest statement: Disclosures: All authors have completed and
submitted the ICMJE Form for Disclosure of Potential Conflicts of Interest. Drs
Kallogjeri and Piccirillo own stock in and serve as consultants for Potentia
Systems. No other disclosures are reported.


2207. J Surg Oncol. 2013 May;107(6):625-33. doi: 10.1002/jso.23292. Epub 2012 Nov 28.

Nodal status is not a prognostic factor in patients with HPV-positive
oral/oropharyngeal tumors.

Klozar J(1), Koslabova E, Kratochvil V, Salakova M, Tachezy R.

Author information: 
(1)First Faculty of Medicine, Department of Otolaryngology, Head and Neck
Surgery, Charles University in Prague, Prague, Czech Republic.
jan.klozar@lfmotol.cuni.cz

OBJECTIVES: The primary aim is to compare the prognostic parameters in patients
with HPV-positive and HPV-negative tumors. The secondary aim is to compare the
patterns of treatment failure between these groups.
METHODS: Analysis of prognostic factors in a group of 170 patients.
RESULTS: High-risk HPV DNA was detected in 98 cases, 72 tumors were HPV negative.
Both the overall and disease-specific survival rates were better in HPV-positive 
patients. In patients with HPV-negative tumors, the prognostic factors in
univariate analysis were pT and pN classification, tumor stage, number of
positive nodes, and extracapsular spread. Stage, pT, higher pN, and number of
nodes maintained statistical significance after adjustment. None of the studied
prognostic factors was significant in the group of patients with HPV-positive
tumors. There was a significant difference in the local--regional recurrence
rates--37% in HPV-negative cases and 18% in HPV-positive cases.
CONCLUSION: The characteristics of the extent of the disease in general and of
regional lymph node metastasis in particular are probably much less important in 
the prediction of the outcome of HPV-positive than of HPV-negative tumors.
Improved survival of patients with HPV-positive tumors is due mostly to the
difference in the local-regional failure rates.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/jso.23292 
PMID: 23192334  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
