

2220. Eur Arch Otorhinolaryngol. 2009 Nov;266(11):1711-8. doi:
10.1007/s00405-009-0967-y. Epub 2009 Apr 2.

Otosclerosis: an organ-specific inflammatory disease with sensorineural hearing
loss.

Sziklai I(1), Batta TJ, Karosi T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, Medical and Health
Science Center, University of Debrecen, Debrecen, Hungary.

Otosclerosis is an inflammatory disease associated with persistent measles virus 
(MV) infection of the otic capsule. The nature of sensorineural hearing loss
(SNHL) related to otosclerosis can be due to the chronic TNF-alpha release from
the foci. TNF-alpha enters the inner ear fluid spaces in histologically active
stages of otosclerosis and may cause outer hair cell functional disorder and
subsequent SNHL without morphological changes of the organ of Corti. On the
contrary, non-otosclerotic stapes ankylosis being a non-inflammatory disease is
not harmful for hair cells. Theoretically, SNHL should not associate to this type
of stapes fixation. Stapes footplates (N = 248) were examined by
hematoxylin-eosin staining and corresponding MV-, OPG- and TNF-alpha-specific
RT-PCR. Anti-measles IgG levels of serum specimens were measured by ELISA.
Preoperative audiological results were correlated with otosclerotic and
non-otosclerotic histopathologies. Among patients with stapes fixation, we found 
93 active and 67 inactive otosclerosis, and 88 non-otosclerotic stapes ankylosis.
MV could only be detected in otosclerotic stapes footplates. Audiometry revealed 
bone conduction threshold elevation toward the high frequencies in otosclerotic
patients, which was associated to the duration of hearing loss. OPG mRNA
expression was significantly lower in the TNF-alpha positive specimens, which was
independent from virus positivity. In about one-third of stapes fixations, the
etiology is non-otosclerotic stapes ankylosis. Histologic otosclerosis exhibits a
strong correlation with MV presence in the bone as a sign of persistent MV
infection and related inflammation with TNF-alpha release. This causes SNHL in
the function of time. Non-otosclerotic stapes fixations do not cause
high-frequency SNHL.

DOI: 10.1007/s00405-009-0967-y 
PMID: 19340443  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
