

2251. Laryngoscope. 2009 Oct;119(10):1951-7. doi: 10.1002/lary.20593.

Human papillomavirus reduces the prognostic value of nodal involvement in
tonsillar squamous cell carcinomas.

Straetmans JM(1), Olthof N, Mooren JJ, de Jong J, Speel EJ, Kremer B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, GROW Institute,
Maastricht University Medical Centre, Maastricht, The Netherlands.
jos.straetmans@mumc.nl

OBJECTIVES/HYPOTHESIS: Assessment of the prognostic value of nodal status in
relation to human papillomavirus (HPV) status and the various treatment
modalities in tonsillar squamous cell carcinomas (TSCC).
STUDY DESIGN: Retrospective 5-year survival analysis.
METHODS: A 5-year follow-up of disease-free, disease-specific, and overall
survival in a group of 81 patients with TSCC was conducted. The nodal status and 
integration of HPV-DNA in the genome (detected with fluorescence in situ
hybridization) as prognostic indicators were examined while correcting for other 
clinical parameters (smoking habits, alcohol consumption, treatment modality,
differentiation, TNM classification).
RESULTS: Of TSCCs, 41% were positive for HPV type 16. In these TSCCs, the primary
tumor was significantly smaller when compared to HVP-negative TSCCs (P = .04),
whereas the percentage of cases with cervical metastases was identical. In the
total population, it was not nodal involvement, but rather HPV manifestation,
which was related to patient prognosis. Within the treatment modalities (surgery 
combined with radiotherapy and radiotherapy alone), neither nodal status nor HPV 
were prognostic indicators.
CONCLUSIONS: Since a substantial percentage of TSCCs are HPV-positive and
metastasizes to cervical lymph nodes in less advanced primary tumors, the N
status is an unreliable prognostic indicator in TSCCs. HPV is only prognostically
relevant in the total tumor population, but loses its value within patient groups
receiving a single treatment modality. The value of HPV for prognosis of patients
with TSCC requires further study.

DOI: 10.1002/lary.20593 
PMID: 19650127  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
