
Conflict of interest statement: No potential conflicts of interest are disclosed.


2267. JAMA Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2017 Jun 1;143(6):614-622. doi:
10.1001/jamaoto.2016.4736.

Adjuvant Human Papillomavirus Vaccination for Secondary Prevention: A Systematic 
Review.

Dion GR(1), Teng S(1), Boyd LR(2), Northam A(1), Mason-Apps C(1), Vieira D(3),
Amin MR(1), Branski RC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, New York University School
of Medicine, New York, New York.
(2)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, New York University School of
Medicine, New York, New York.
(3)Department of Medical Library Services, New York University School of
Medicine, New York, New York.

Importance: Human papillomavirus (HPV) vaccination is recommended for children
and younger adults but not older adults or those with prior HPV exposure, leaving
a large portion of the population at risk for HPV-mediated disease. Emerging data
suggest a possible role for vaccination as an adjuvant treatment for individuals 
with HPV-related clinical disease.
Objective: To systematically review the literature regarding HPV vaccination for 
secondary disease prevention after treatment of active clinical disease across
disease sites to serve as a platform for the management of HPV-related disease of
the head and neck.
Evidence Review: A systematic search from August 3 to 21, 2015, of the PubMed,
MEDLINE, EMBASE, CINAHL, Cochrane Library, Web of Science, Biosis Citation Index,
Current Contents Connect, Scientific Library Online, and Global Health databases 
used PRISMA guidelines to identify 326 relevant articles related to adjuvant use 
of HPV vaccination. Primary search terms were (HPV vaccine OR human
papillomavirus vaccine OR papillomarvirus vaccines OR alphapapillomavirus
vaccine) AND (HPV OR human papillomavirus OR alphapapillomavirus OR
papillomaviridae OR virus warts OR wart virus) AND (recurrence OR relapse OR
reoccurrence OR recurrences OR relapses OR relapsing). Forty-five full texts in
English were reviewed, with 19 articles included in the final review. In some
studies, subpopulations of individuals with HPV DNA positivity and/or
seropositivity were extracted for inclusion. Included studies were assessed for
bias and separated based on the presence of active clinical disease or HPV DNA
positivity or seropositivity.
Findings: Nineteen studies with 22 474 unique patients were included in the
review. When HPV vaccination was used as an adjuvant treatment for active
clinical disease, 9 of 12 studies reported decreased disease recurrence,
decreased disease burden, or increased intersurgical interval. In contrast, none 
of the 7 studies of vaccination in individuals with HPV DNA positivity and/or
seropositivity without clinical disease reported improved outcomes.
Conclusions and Relevance: Differences between adjuvant vaccination in
HPV-mediated clinical disease and vaccination in HPV DNA-positive and/or
HPV-seropositive populations posit underlying differences in disease and immune
processes. These data suggest that additional evaluation of adjuvant HPV
vaccination in individuals with active clinical disease is warranted.

DOI: 10.1001/jamaoto.2016.4736 
PMID: 28334393  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
