

2271. PLoS One. 2015 Aug 6;10(8):e0135074. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0135074.
eCollection 2015.

Genome-Wide Loss of Heterozygosity and DNA Copy Number Aberration in HPV-Negative
Oral Squamous Cell Carcinoma and Their Associations with Disease-Specific
Survival.

Chen C(1), Zhang Y(2), Loomis MM(3), Upton MP(4), Lohavanichbutr P(3), Houck
JR(3), Doody DR(3), Mendez E(5), Futran N(6), Schwartz SM(7), Wang P(8).

Author information: 
(1)Program in Epidemiology, Division of Public Health Sciences, Fred Hutchinson
Cancer Research Center, Seattle, Washington, United States of America; Department
of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, University of Washington, Seattle,
Washington, United States of America; Department of Epidemiology, University of
Washington, Seattle, Washington, United States of America.
(2)Program in Biostatistics and Biomathematics, Division of Public Health
Sciences, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle, Washington, United
States of America.
(3)Program in Epidemiology, Division of Public Health Sciences, Fred Hutchinson
Cancer Research Center, Seattle, Washington, United States of America.
(4)Department of Pathology, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington, United
States of America.
(5)Program in Epidemiology, Division of Public Health Sciences, Fred Hutchinson
Cancer Research Center, Seattle, Washington, United States of America; Department
of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, University of Washington, Seattle,
Washington, United States of America; Clinical Research Division, Fred Hutchinson
Cancer Research Center, Seattle, Washington, United States of America.
(6)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, University of Washington, 
Seattle, Washington, United States of America.
(7)Program in Epidemiology, Division of Public Health Sciences, Fred Hutchinson
Cancer Research Center, Seattle, Washington, United States of America; Department
of Epidemiology, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington, United States of 
America.
(8)Program in Biostatistics and Biomathematics, Division of Public Health
Sciences, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle, Washington, United
States of America; Department of Genetics and Genomics Sciences, Mt. Sinai School
of Medicine, New York, New York, United States of America.

Oral squamous cell cancer of the oral cavity and oropharynx (OSCC) is associated 
with high case-fatality. For reasons that are largely unknown, patients with the 
same clinical and pathologic staging have heterogeneous response to treatment and
different probability of recurrence and survival, with patients with Human
Papillomavirus (HPV)-positive oropharyngeal tumors having the most favorable
survival. To gain insight into the complexity of OSCC and to identify potential
chromosomal changes that may be associated with OSCC mortality, we used Affymtrix
6.0 SNP arrays to examine paired DNA from peripheral blood and tumor cell
populations isolated by laser capture microdissection to assess genome-wide loss 
of heterozygosity (LOH) and DNA copy number aberration (CNA) and their
associations with risk factors, tumor characteristics, and oral cancer-specific
mortality among 75 patients with HPV-negative OSCC. We found a highly
heterogeneous and complex genomic landscape of HPV-negative tumors, and
identified regions in 4q, 8p, 9p and 11q that seem to play an important role in
oral cancer biology and survival from this disease. If confirmed, these findings 
could assist in designing personalized treatment or in the creation of models to 
predict survival in patients with HPV-negative OSCC.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0135074 
PMCID: PMC4527746
PMID: 26247464  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
