

2275. J Med Assoc Thai. 2009 Mar;92 Suppl 2:S95-100.

Retrospective study of patients with herpes simplex encephalitis and positive CSF
PCR.

Pleumpanupat P(1), Danchaivijitr N, Danchaivijitr C.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Neurology, Department of Medicine, Siriraj Hospital, Mahidol
University, Bangkok, Thailand.

OBJECTIVE: To determine the clinical presentations, laboratory and imaging
findings of patients with HSE and positive CSF PCR then compare these with
information from other viral encephalitis patients in order to find clinical
clues that might help clinicians in early diagnosis and treatment of HSE while
awaiting for the CSF PCR result.
MATERIAL AND METHOD: A patient group with both HSE and positive CSF PCR and a
control group of patients with other viral encephalitis were identified from
Siriraj Hospital database within the period of 1997-2006. Medical notes of these 
patients were reviewed and relevant information, including clinical, laboratory
and imaging study, were extracted. Then, descriptive statistics, unpaired t-test 
and Fisher's exact test were performed with the purpose to determine any clinical
or laboratory clues that are significantly different between these two groups,
which might help clinicians in making an early diagnosis of HSE.
RESULTS: Seven HSE cases and 22 cases in control group were included. Fever,
headache, alteration of consciousness, behavioral change, neck stiffness are the 
most commonly found clinical presentations in HSE patients with CSF PCR positive.
CSF examination show CSF leukocytosis with lymphocyte predominate, decreased
CSF:blood glucose ratio and elevated CSF protein in all cases. However, no single
clinical or laboratory finding helps in differentiating HSE with positive CSF PCR
from other viral encephalitides, except radiological abnormalities of temporal
lobe, which yields a positive predictive value of 0.5 and a negative predictive
value of 0.93.
CONCLUSION: Our study showed that HSE shares common clinical and laboratory
findings with other viral encephalitides, except for temporal lobe involvement.
Early diagnosis is important and empirical acyclovir should be commenced early in
patients with viral encephalitis, especially for those with radiological
abnormalities on the temporal lobe.


PMID: 19562992  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
