

2277. Epigenetics. 2014 Feb;9(2):308-17. doi: 10.4161/epi.27120. Epub 2013 Nov 15.

Genome-wide methylation profiling reveals Zinc finger protein 516 (ZNF516) and
FK-506-binding protein 6 (FKBP6) promoters frequently methylated in cervical
neoplasia, associated with HPV status and ethnicity in a Chilean population.

Brebi P(1), Maldonado L(2), Noordhuis MG(3), Ili C(1), Leal P(1), Garcia P(4),
Brait M(5), Ribas J(6), Michailidi C(2), Perez J(2), Soudry E(2), Tapia O(4),
Guzman P(4), Muñoz S(7), Van Neste L(8), Van Criekinge W(9), Irizarry R(10),
Sidransky D(2), Roa JC(11), Guerrero-Preston R(2).

Author information: 
(1)Otolaryngology Department; Head and Neck Cancer Research Division; The Johns
Hopkins University School of Medicine; Baltimore, MD USA; School of Medicine;
Department of Pathology; Molecular Pathology Laboratory; Universidad de La
Frontera; BIOREN-CEGIN; Temuco, Chile.
(2)Otolaryngology Department; Head and Neck Cancer Research Division; The Johns
Hopkins University School of Medicine; Baltimore, MD USA.
(3)Otolaryngology Department; Head and Neck Cancer Research Division; The Johns
Hopkins University School of Medicine; Baltimore, MD USA; Department of
Gynecologic Oncology; University Medical Center Groningen; Groningen, the
Netherlands.
(4)School of Medicine; Department of Pathology; Molecular Pathology Laboratory;
Universidad de La Frontera; BIOREN-CEGIN; Temuco, Chile.
(5)Otolaryngology Department; Head and Neck Cancer Research Division; The Johns
Hopkins University School of Medicine; Baltimore, MD USA; Clinical Research
Coordination; Instituto Nacional de Câncer; Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.
(6)Pharmacology Unit; Department of Experimental Medicine; University of Lleida; 
Lleida, Spain.
(7)School of Medicine; Department of Public Health; Universidad de La Frontera;
Temuco, Chile.
(8)MDxHealth PharmacoDx; Ghent, Belgium.
(9)MDxHealth PharmacoDx; Ghent, Belgium; BIOBIX; Department of Bioscience
Engineering; Ghent University; Ghent Belgium.
(10)Bloomberg School of Public Health; Biostatistics Department; The Johns
Hopkins University; Baltimore, MD USA.
(11)School of Medicine; Department of Pathology; Molecular Pathology Laboratory; 
Universidad de La Frontera; BIOREN-CEGIN; Temuco, Chile; School of Medicine;
Department of Pathology; Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile; Santiago,
Chile.

Cervical cancer is a major health concern among women in Latin America due to its
high incidence and mortality. Therefore, the discovery of molecular markers for
cervical cancer screening and triage is imperative. The aim of this study was to 
use a genome wide DNA methylation approach to identify novel methylation
biomarkers in cervical cancer. DNA from normal cervical mucosa and cervical
cancer tissue samples from Chile was enriched with Methylated DNA
Immunoprecipitation (MeDIP), hybridized to oligonucleotide methylation
microarrays and analyzed with a stringent bioinformatics pipeline to identify
differentially methylated regions (DMRs) as candidate biomarkers. Quantitative
Methylation Specific PCR (qMSP) was used to study promoter methylation of
candidate DMRs in clinical samples from two independent cohorts. HPV detection
and genotyping were performed by Reverse Line Blot analysis. Bioinformatics
analysis revealed GGTLA4, FKBP6, ZNF516, SAP130, and INTS1 to be differentially
methylated in cancer and normal tissues in the Discovery cohort. In the
Validation cohort FKBP6 promoter methylation had 73% sensitivity and 80%
specificity (AUC = 0.80). ZNF516 promoter methylation was the best biomarker,
with both sensitivity and specificity of 90% (AUC = 0.92), results subsequently
corroborated in a Prevalence cohort. Together, ZNF516 and FKBP6 exhibited a
sensitivity of 84% and specificity of 81%, when considering both cohorts. Our
genome wide DNA methylation assessment approach (MeDIP-chip) successfully
identified novel biomarkers that differentiate between cervical cancer and normal
samples, after adjusting for age and HPV status. These biomarkers need to be
further explored in case-control and prospective cohorts to validate them as
cervical cancer biomarkers.

DOI: 10.4161/epi.27120 
PMCID: PMC3962541
PMID: 24241165  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
