

2310. Otol Neurotol. 2014 Jan;35(1):e1-6. doi: 10.1097/MAO.0000000000000218.

Unbiased stereologic estimation of the spatial distribution of Paget's disease in
the human temporal bone.

Bloch SL(1), Sørensen MS.

Author information: 
(1)*Department of Otolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, Køge Hospital,
University of Copenhagen, Denmark; and †Department of Otolaryngology, Head and
Neck Surgery, Rigshospitalet, University Hospital of Copenhagen, Denmark.

BACKGROUND: It has been suggested that Paget's disease of bone and otosclerosis
may share a myxoviral etiology. However, the association between virus infection 
and pathologic bone remodeling is still controversial. The aim of this study was 
to estimate the spatial distribution of pagetic bone remodeling around the inner 
ear space and to compare it with that of otosclerosis in a contemporary context
of temporal bone dynamics.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: From the temporal bone collection of Massachusetts Eye and
Ear Infirmary, 15 of 29 temporal bones with Paget's disease were selected to
obtain an independent sample. All volume distributions were obtained along the
normal axis of capsular bone remodeling activity by the use of vector-based
stereology.
RESULTS: Pagetic bone remodeling was distributed centrifugally around the inner
ear space at the individual and the general level. This pattern is similar to the
normal distribution of perilabyrinthine bone remodeling but entirely different
from the spatial location of otosclerosis, which are focal and centripetally
distributed around the inner ear space.
CONCLUSION: In Paget's disease, the antiresorptive barrier around the inner ear
space becomes gradually overruled as pagetic bone resorption invades the otic
capsule from the outside. However, in otosclerosis, this barrier has somehow
failed locally inside the otic capsule. Although virus infections potentially may
trigger osteoclastic activity additional pathogenetic factors are needed to
explain the organ-specific nature and spatial properties of otosclerosis.

DOI: 10.1097/MAO.0000000000000218 
PMID: 24335937  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
