

2312. Cancer Biomark. 2013;13(5):385-94. doi: 10.3233/CBM-130371.

Optimization of circulating cell-free DNA recovery for KRAS mutation and HPV
detection in plasma.

Mazurek AM(1), Fiszer-Kierzkowska A(1), Rutkowski T(2), Składowski K(2), Pierzyna
M(1), Scieglińska D(1), Woźniak G(3), Głowacki G(3), Kawczyński R(3), Małusecka
E(1).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Translational Research and Molecular Biology of Cancer, Maria
Sklodowska-Curie Memorial Cancer Center and Institute of Oncology, Gliwice
Branch, Gliwice, Poland.
(2)I Radiotherapy Clinic, Maria Sklodowska-Curie Memorial Cancer Center and
Institute of Oncology, Gliwice Branch, Gliwice, Poland.
(3)Department of Radiotherapy, Maria Sklodowska-Curie Memorial Cancer Center and 
Institute of Oncology, Gliwice Branch, Gliwice, Poland.

BACKGROUND: The precise analysis of tumour markers in blood such as circulating
cell-free DNA (cfDNA) could have a significant impact in facilitating monitoring 
of patients after initial therapy. Although high levels of total cfDNA in plasma 
of cancer patients are consistently demonstrated, a low sensitivity of DNA
alterations is reported.
OBJECTIVE: The major question regards the recovery of tumour-specific cfDNA such 
as KRAS mutated DNA and cancer-associated type 16 of human papillomavirus
(HPV16).
METHODS: TaqMan technology was used for detection of KRAS mutation, HPV16 and to 
quantify cfDNA in blood plasma.
RESULTS: Comparison of four different column-based commercial kits shows that the
cfDNA purification carried out by the Genomic Mini AX Body Fluids kit and the
QIAamp Circulating Nucleic Acid kit gave us the possibility to improve the
sensitivity of detection of KRAS mutation and HPV16. The optimized method was
used to follow the reduction in cancer-specific cfDNA after therapy. We found
that large volume extractions with low volume of DNA eluate enabled trace amounts
of tumour-specific cfDNA from cancer patients to be effectively identified.
CONCLUSIONS: Data presented in this study facilitate detection of tumour-specific
cfDNA and improve standards needed for the implementation of cfDNA technology
into routine clinical practice.

DOI: 10.3233/CBM-130371 
PMID: 24440979  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
