

2323. Klin Mikrobiol Infekc Lek. 2016 Sep;22(3):100-104.

[Epidemiology, etiology and clinical picture of enteroviral meningitis in
children in South Moravia].

[Article in Czech]

Braunová A(1), Rainetová P, Krbková L, Čapovová I, Klapačová L, Musil V, Musílek 
M, Bednářová J.

Author information: 
(1)Depatrment of Children's Infectious Disease, Faculty of Medicine and
University Hospital, Masaryk University, Brno, Czech Republic, e-mail:
braunova.adriana@fnbrno.cz.

OBJECTIVES: Enteroviruses (EVs) are the most common cause of aseptic viral
meningitis. In some cases, they can cause severe meningoencephalitis and acute
flaccid paralysis - an association with some virulent serotypes. The objectives
were to describe the epidemiological situation of EV meningitis in children in
South Moravia, to elucidate the etiology including the incidence of virulent
serotypes and to evaluate the clinical presentation.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: A total of 88 children with EV meningitis were
prospectively evaluated. In case of aseptic inflammation in the cerebrospinal
fluid, EV was detected using real-time PCR. Genotyping was performed in 56
samples using repeated one-step PCR and partial sequencing on a genetic analyzer 
in the National Reference Laboratory for Enteroviruses in Prague.
RESULTS: The patients' age range was 3-17 years; there were more boys than girls.
Two epidemics occurred, one involving 17 Roma children and the other involving 8 
swimming pool visitors. The most common symptoms were headache, fever and stiff
neck. The most frequently (59%) detected agent was Echovirus 30 identified as the
cause of the epidemics. In one boy, EV 71 (virulent serotype) was found. The
clinical course did not vary from that in other serotypes. All 88 children
recovered without complications.
CONCLUSIONS: EVs are an important part of the differential diagnosis of
neuroinfections, although most infections are benign aseptic meningitis. The
clinical presentation did not vary between infections with various serotypes.
Higher incidence rates of virulent serotypes were not reported. Echovirus 30 was 
detected most frequently and was repeatedly identified as the cause of epidemics 
throughout the Czech Republic.


PMID: 27907970  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
