

2324. Ann Oncol. 2014 Nov;25(11):2115-24. doi: 10.1093/annonc/mdu105. Epub 2014 Mar 7.

Best practices in the management of the psycho-oncologic aspects of head and neck
cancer patients: recommendations from the European Head and Neck Cancer Society
Make Sense Campaign.

Reich M(1), Leemans CR(2), Vermorken JB(3), Bernier J(4), Licitra L(5), Parmar
S(6), Golusinski W(7), Lefebvre JL(8).

Author information: 
(1)Psycho-oncology Team, Centre Oscar Lambret, Lille, France
m-reich@o-lambret.fr.
(2)Department of Otolaryngology/Head and Neck Surgery, VU University Medical
Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(3)Department of Medical Oncology, Antwerp University Hospital, Antwerpen,
Belgium.
(4)Department of Radio-Oncology, Clinique de Genolier, Genolier, Switzerland.
(5)Istituto Nazionale per lo Studio e la Cura dei Tumori, Milan, Italy.
(6)Maxillofacial Department, Queen Elizabeth Hospital, Birmingham, UK.
(7)The Greater Poland Cancer Centre, Poznań University of Medical Sciences,
Poznań, Poland.
(8)Departement of Head and Neck Cancer, Centre Oscar Lambret, Lille, France.

Squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck (SCCHN) is considered a worldwide
health care problem. The majority of patients have a history of alcohol abuse and
high-level tobacco consumption; however, SCCHN is also associated with exposure
to viruses including human papillomavirus (HPV) and Epstein-Barr virus. A major
problem facing SCCHN patients is that their disease is often diagnosed at an
advanced stage where treatment options may not be curative, or can have severe
post-treatment consequences. Confronted with their diagnosis and treatment
options, the patient can express a range of emotional reactions which may lead to
maladaptive coping. During the SCCHN patient journey, there are a number of
stages where emotional support could be offered. A point of contact should be
allocated to help patients navigate these stages and deliver practical emotive
support (such as encouraging attendance at hospital appointments, compliance with
lifestyle modifications and treatment adherence), and to identify if or when more
advanced emotive support, in the form of a mental health professional, might be
needed. This role might be carried out by a representative within the
multidisciplinary health care team (e.g. a nurse). While optimal care is provided
by specialist health care professionals, each with specific roles and
responsibilities during the patient journey, all are important in screening for
emotional distress and providing referral to the mental health team. This article
reviews the key points for delivering emotional support to SCCHN patients at each
stage of their care. Emotional problems cannot be ignored in SCCHN patients if
optimal outcomes are to be achieved, particularly as therapeutic options extend
overall survival for many patients. Health care professionals must be able to
implement efficient screening for psychological distress to support patient's
compliance to their care and treatment. They must also be able to recognize when 
to refer patients at risk for pharmacological and/or psychotherapeutic
interventions.

© The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the European
Society for Medical Oncology. All rights reserved. For permissions, please email:
journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/annonc/mdu105 
PMID: 24608199  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
