

2339. Radiother Oncol. 2016 Feb;118(2):359-68. doi: 10.1016/j.radonc.2015.12.007. Epub 
2015 Dec 30.

Growth inhibition and chemo-radiosensitization of head and neck squamous cell
carcinoma (HNSCC) by survivin-siRNA lentivirus.

Khan Z(1), Khan AA(2), Prasad GB(3), Khan N(4), Tiwari RP(5), Bisen PS(6).

Author information: 
(1)School of Studies in Biotechnology, Jiwaji University, Gwalior, India;
Departments of Biomedical Sciences and Pathology and Laboratory Medicine,
Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles, USA. Electronic address:
zakirq.khan@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Pharmaceutics, College of Pharmacy, King Saud University,
Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.
(3)School of Studies in Biotechnology, Jiwaji University, Gwalior, India.
(4)Division of Plant-Microbe Interactions, National Botanical Research Institute,
Lucknow, India.
(5)Diagnostic Division, Vanguard Diagnostics, New Delhi, India.
(6)School of Studies in Biotechnology, Jiwaji University, Gwalior, India.
Electronic address: psbisen@gmail.com.

BACKGROUND: Survivin expression is often associated with aggressive tumor
behavior and therapy resistance. In this study, we investigated the effect of
survivin knockdown by survivin-siRNA lentiviral vector (Svv-Lent) on the response
of HNSCC to chemo-radiotherapy, tumor growth and metastasis.
METHODS: Four human HNSCC (OSC19, Cal27, Cal33 and FaDu) and one normal HOK cell 
lines were included in the study, and survivin knockdown was achieved with
Svv-Lent treatment. Cell proliferation and apoptosis were measured by MTT and
TUNEL assay, respectively. Transwell assays were performed to measure in vitro
cell migration and matrigel invasion. Xenograft tumors were developed in nude
mice by injecting Cal27 cells subcutaneously and following tail-vein injection of
lung and liver metastasis.
RESULTS: Knockdown of survivin significantly suppressed HNSCC cell proliferation 
and induced apoptosis in vitro. Survivin inhibition could also significantly
reduce in vitro cell migration and matrigel invasion that might be due to
inactivation of matrix metalloproteinases. In vivo studies showed significant
repression of Cal27 xenograft tumor growth and tissue metastasis leading to
improvement in mice survival in the Svv-Lent treated group compared to controls. 
Our data indicated that survivin expression in HNSCC cells contributed to
chemo-radioresistance, and its down-regulation increased anti-cancer effects of
paclitaxel, cisplatin and radiation.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings suggest that sustained survivin expression facilitates 
HNSCC tumor growth and confers resistance to chemo-radiotherapy. Svv-Lent therapy
may be able to enhance the cytotoxic effect of commonly used anticancer drugs
such as cisplatin and paclitaxel, and radiotherapy that could provide a promising
strategy for the effective control of resistant head and neck cancer.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.radonc.2015.12.007 
PMID: 26747757  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
