

2356. Head Neck Pathol. 2015 Jun;9(2):223-35. doi: 10.1007/s12105-014-0566-0. Epub 2014
Sep 19.

Mutation and Transcriptional Profiling of Formalin-Fixed Paraffin Embedded
Specimens as Companion Methods to Immunohistochemistry for Determining
Therapeutic Targets in Oropharyngeal Squamous Cell Carcinoma (OPSCC): A Pilot of 
Proof of Principle.

Saba NF(1), Wilson M, Doho G, DaSilva J, Benjamin Isett R, Newman S, Chen ZG,
Magliocca K, Rossi MR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology and Head and Neck Oncology Program, Winship
Cancer Institute of Emory University, Emory University School of Medicine,
Atlanta, GA, USA, nfsaba@emory.edu.

The role of molecular methods in the diagnosis of head and neck cancer is rapidly
evolving and holds great potential for improving outcomes for all patients who
suffer from this diverse group of malignancies . However, there is considerable
debate as to the best clinical approaches, particularly for Next Generation
Sequencing (NGS). The choices of NGS methods such as whole exome, whole genome,
whole transcriptomes (RNA-Seq) or multiple gene resequencing panels, each have
strengths and weakness based on data quality, the size of the data, the
turnaround time for data analysis, and clinical actionability. There have also
been a variety of gene expression signatures established from microarray studies 
that correlate with relapse and response to treatment, but none of these methods 
have been implemented as standard of care for oropharyngeal squamous cell
carcinoma (OPSCC). Because many genomic methodologies are still far from the
capabilities of most clinical laboratories, we chose to explore the use of a
combination of off the shelf targeted mutation analysis and gene expression
analysis methods to complement standard anatomical pathology methods.
Specifically, we have used the Ion Torrent AmpliSeq cancer panel in combination
with the NanoString nCounter Human Cancer Reference Kit on 8 formalin-fixed
paraffin embedded (FFPE) OPSCC tumor specimens, (4) HPV-positive and (4)
HPV-negative. Differential expression analysis between HPV-positive and negative 
groups showed that expression of several genes was highly likely to correlate
with HPV status. For example, WNT1, PDGFA and OGG1 were all over-expressed in the
positive group. Our results show the utility of these methods with routine FFPE
clinical specimens to identify potential therapeutic targets which could be
readily applied in a clinical trial setting for clinical laboratories lacking the
instrumentation or bioinformatics infrastructure to support comprehensive
genomics workflows. To the best of our knowledge, these preliminary experiments
are among the earliest to combine both mutational and gene expression profiles
using Ion Torrent and NanoString technologies. This reports serves as a proof of 
principle methodology in OPSCC.

DOI: 10.1007/s12105-014-0566-0 
PMCID: PMC4424213
PMID: 25236499  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
