

2359. J Pharm Pharm Sci. 2015;18(2):220-34.

Strategies for Developing Oral Vaccines for Human Papillomavirus (HPV) Induced
Cancer using Nanoparticle mediated Delivery System.

Uddin MN(1), Kouzi SA, Hussain MD.

Author information: 
(1)School of Pharmacy, Levine College of Health Science, Wingate University,
Wingate, NC, USA.

Human Papillomaviruses (HPV) are a diverse group of small non-enveloped DNA
viruses. Some HPVs are classified as low-risk as they are very rarely associated 
with neoplasia or cancer in the general population, and cause lenient warts.
Other HPVs are considered as high-risk types because they are responsible for
several important human cancers, including cervical cancer, a large proportion of
other anogenital cancers, and a growing number of head and neck cancers.
Transmission of HPV occurs primarily by skin-to-skin contact. The risk of
contracting genital HPV infection and cervical cancer is influenced by sexual
activity. Currently two prophylactic HPV vaccines, Gardasil® (Merck, USA) and
Cervarix® (GlaxoSmithKline, UK), are available and recommended for mass
immunization of adolescents. However, these vaccines have limitations as they are
expensive and require cold chain storage and trained personnel to administer them
by injection. The use of nano or micro particulate vaccines could address most of
these limitations as they are stable at room temperature, inexpensive to produce 
and distribute to resource poor regions, and can be administered orally without
the need for adjuvants in the formulation. Also it is possible to increase the
efficiency of these particulate vaccines by decorating the surface of the nano or
micro particulates with suitable ligands for targeted delivery. Oral vaccines,
which can be delivered using particulate formulations, have the added potential
to stimulate mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue located in the digestive tract and
the gut-associated lymphoid tissue, both of which are important for the induction
of effective mucosal response against many viruses. In addition, oral vaccines
provide the opportunity to reduce production and administration costs and are
very patient compliant. This review elaborately discusses different strategies
that can be pursued to develop a nano or micro particulate oral vaccine for HPV
induced cancers and other diseases.


PMID: 26158287  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
