

236. Acta Otorrinolaringol Esp. 2016 May-Jun;67(3):135-41. doi:
10.1016/j.otorri.2015.05.002. Epub 2015 Aug 12.

Oropharyngeal perinatal colonization by human papillomavirus.

[Article in English, Spanish]

Sánchez-Torices MS(1), Corrales-Millan R(2), Hijona-Elosegui JJ(3).

Author information: 
(1)Servicio de Otorrinolaringología, Complejo Hospitalario de Jaén, Jaén, España.
Electronic address: marisolsancheztorices@gmail.com.
(2)Servicio de Otorrinolaringología, Complejo Hospitalario de Jaén, Jaén, España.
(3)Servicio de Ginecología y Obstetricia, Complejo Hospitalario de Jaén, Jaén,
España.

INTRODUCTION AND OBJECTIVE: Human papillomavirus (HPV) infection is the most
common human sexually transmitted disease. It is clinically relevant because this
condition is necessary for the development of epithelial cervical cancer, and it 
is also a factor closely associated with the occurrence of diverse tumours and
various benign and malignant lesions of the head and neck area. The infective
mechanism in most of these cases is associated with sexual intercourse, but there
is recent scientific evidence suggesting that HPV infection may also be acquired 
by other routes of infection not necessarily linked to sexual contact. One of
them is vertical transmission from mother to child, either during pregnancy or at
the time of delivery. The aim of our research was to study maternal-foetal HPV
transmission during childbirth in detail, establishing the rate of oropharyngeal 
neonatal HPV in vaginal deliveries.
METHOD: The presence and type of HPV viral DNA at the time of delivery in samples
of maternal cervical secretions, amniotic fluid, venous cord blood samples and
neonatal oropharynx in pregnant women (and their babies) were determined.
RESULTS: The rate of oropharyngeal neonatal HPV colonization in vaginal
deliveries was 58.24%.
CONCLUSIONS: The maternal and neonatal HPV colonization mechanism is essentially,
but not exclusively, transvaginal.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier España, S.L.U. y Sociedad Española de
Otorrinolaringología y Cirugía de Cabeza y Cuello. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.otorri.2015.05.002 
PMID: 26275464  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
