

2366. Int J Cancer. 2012 Nov 1;131(9):1969-82. doi: 10.1002/ijc.27650. Epub 2012 Jul 2.

EUROGIN 2011 roadmap on prevention and treatment of HPV-related disease.

Arbyn M(1), de Sanjosé S, Saraiya M, Sideri M, Palefsky J, Lacey C, Gillison M,
Bruni L, Ronco G, Wentzensen N, Brotherton J, Qiao YL, Denny L, Bornstein J,
Abramowitz L, Giuliano A, Tommasino M, Monsonego J.

Author information: 
(1)Unit of Cancer Epidemiology, Scientific Institute of Public Health, Brussels, 
Belgium. marc.arbyn@wiv-isp.be

The EUROGIN 2011 roadmap reviews the current burden of human papillomavirus
(HPV)-related morbidity, as well as the evidence and potential practice
recommendations regarding primary and secondary prevention and treatment of
cancers and other disease associated with HPV infection. HPV infection causes
~600,000 cases of cancer of the cervix, vulva, vagina, anus and oropharynx
annually, as well as benign diseases such as genital warts and recurrent
respiratory papillomatosis. Whereas the incidence of cervical cancer has been
decreasing over recent decades, the incidence of anal and oropharyngeal
carcinoma, for which there are no effective screening programs, has been rising
over the last couple of decades. Randomized trials have demonstrated improved
efficacy of HPV-based compared to cytology-based cervical cancer screening.
Defining the best algorithms to triage HPV-positive women, age ranges and
screening intervals are priorities for pooled analyses and further research,
whereas feasibility questions can be addressed through screening programs. HPV
vaccination will reduce the burden of cervical precancer and probably also of
invasive cervical and other HPV-related disease in women. Recent trials
demonstrated that prophylactic vaccination also protects against anogenital HPV
infection, anogenital intraepithelial lesions and warts associated with vaccine
types, in males; and anal HPV infection and anal intraepithelial neoplasia in
MSM. HPV-related oropharyngeal cancer could be treated less aggressively because 
of better survival compared to cancers of the oropharynx unrelated to HPV. Key
findings in the field of cervical cancer prevention should now be translated in
cost-effective strategies, following an organized approach integrating primary
and secondary prevention, according to scientific evidence but adapted to the
local situation with particular attention to regions with the highest burden of
disease.

Copyright © 2012 UICC.

DOI: 10.1002/ijc.27650 
PMCID: PMC3429628
PMID: 22623137  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
