

237. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2015 Oct;153(4):518-25. doi:
10.1177/0194599815597200. Epub 2015 Jul 28.

The "HPV Discussion": Effective Use of Data to Deliver Recommendations to
Patients Impacted by HPV.

Khariwala SS(1), Moore MG(2), Malloy KM(3), Gosselin B(4), Smith RV(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, University of Minnesota,
Minneapolis, Minnesota, USA khari001@umn.edu.
(2)Department Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Indiana University,
Indianapolis, Indiana, USA.
(3)Department Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, University of Michigan, Ann
Arbor, Michigan, USA.
(4)Department Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Dartmouth Medical Center,
Manchester, New Hampshire, USA.
(5)Department Otorhinolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Montefiore Medical
Center, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, New York, New York, USA.

OBJECTIVE: The dramatic rise in oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma associated 
with the human papilloma virus (HPV) has brought significant change to the
interaction between patients and head and neck oncologists. HPV-induced cancers
are generally the result of elements from the patient's sexual history, and
otolaryngologists are generally less experienced than primary care physicians in 
addressing patient questions relating to sexual history and practices. This
article addresses questions commonly posed by patients relating to HPV-induced
head and neck cancers, issues related to HPV vaccination, and surveillance of
HPV-related lesions. Supporting data are provided such that physicians may be
better equipped to sufficiently address patient queries on this topic.
DATA SOURCES: Available peer-reviewed literature and clinical practice
guidelines.
REVIEW METHODS: Assessment and discussion of specific topics by authors selected 
from the Head and Neck Surgery Education Committee of the American Academy of
Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery Foundation.
RESULTS: An educational "miniseminar" resulted in a notable increase in attendee 
knowledge and comfort regarding oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma counseling 
for patients in the setting of HPV-positive disease.
CONCLUSIONS AND IMPLICATIONS FOR PRACTICE: The dramatic increase in
HPV-associated head and neck cancers has resulted in a changed paradigm of the
physician-patient interaction. Care providers in today's environment must be
prepared to counsel patients regarding sexually transmitted diseases and
high-risk sexual behaviors. Examination of the existing data provides the
foundation with which to construct a framework in which physicians can
effectively communicate information and recommendations as they pertain to
HPV-related carcinoma.

© American Academy of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery Foundation 2015.

DOI: 10.1177/0194599815597200 
PMCID: PMC4888788
PMID: 26220060  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
