

2371. Anticancer Res. 2014 Jul;34(7):3365-70.

A combined lymphokine-activated killer (LAK) cell immunotherapy and
adenovirus-p53 gene therapy for head and neck squamous cell carcinoma.

Saito H(1), Ando S(2), Morishita N(1), Lee KM(3), Dator D(4), Dy D(5), Shigemura 
K(6), Adhim Z(7), Nibu K(7), Fujisawa M(7), Shirakawa T(8).

Author information: 
(1)Divison of Translational Research for Biologics, Department of Internal
Medicine, Kobe University Graduate School of Medicine, Kobe, Japan.
(2)Department of International Health, Kobe University Graduate School of Health 
Sciences, Kobe, Japan.
(3)Department of Biochemistry, Korea University College of Medicine, Seoul,
Republic of Korea.
(4)Department of Urology, National Kidney and Transplantation Institute, Quezon
City, Philippines.
(5)St. Luke's Medical Center, Global City, Philippines.
(6)Division of Urology, Department of Surgery, Kobe University Graduate School of
Medicine, Kobe, Japan.
(7)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Kobe University Graduate
School of Medicine, Kobe, Japan.
(8)Divison of Translational Research for Biologics, Department of Internal
Medicine, Kobe University Graduate School of Medicine, Kobe, Japan Department of 
International Health, Kobe University Graduate School of Health Sciences, Kobe,
Japan Division of Urology, Department of Surgery, Kobe University Graduate School
of Medicine, Kobe, Japan toshiro@med.kobe-u.ac.jp.

BACKGROUND: The antitumor activity of lymphokine activated killer (LAK) cells
immunotherapy is not always effective in all patients, especially when used
alone. In this study, we investigated the in vitro antitumor activities of a
combination of LAK immunotherapy and gene therapy employing an adenovirus
carrying the p53 gene (Ad-p53) in human head and neck squamous cell carcinoma.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The in vitro cytotoxicity of LAK cells was tested in H891 
cells infected with or without Ad-p53, and the mRNA expression levels of natural 
killer group 2D ligands (UL16 binding protein (ULBP) 1 to 5) and tumor necrosis
factor (TNF-α) in these cells were measured by real-time reverse transcription
polymerase chain reaction.
RESULTS: Ad-p53 infection increased the cytotoxicity of LAK cells against H891
cells, and also increased the mRNA expression levels of the ULBPs in H891 cells
and TNF-α in the LAK cells.
CONCLUSION: The antitumor activities of LAK cells in H891 cells were enhanced by 
Ad-p53.
CONCLUSION: The combinational therapy of LAK immunotherapy and Ad-p53 gene
therapy may represent a new paradigm for the treatment of head and neck cancer.

Copyright© 2014 International Institute of Anticancer Research (Dr. John G.
Delinassios), All rights reserved.


PMID: 24982341  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
