

2374. HNO. 2016 Apr;64(4):221-6. doi: 10.1007/s00106-016-0147-5.

[Is (chemo)radiotherapy really the future standard in the treatment of
oropharyngeal carcinoma?].

[Article in German]

Knecht R(1), Bussmann L(2), Möckelmann N(2), Lörincz BB(2).

Author information: 
(1)Klinik und Poliklinik für Hals-, Nasen- und Ohrenheilkunde,
Kopf-Hals-Chirurgie und Onkologie; Kopf-Hals-Tumorzentrum des Universitären
Cancer Center Hamburg (UCCH), Universitätsklinikum Hamburg-Eppendorf,
Martinistrasse 52, 20246, Hamburg, Deutschland. r.knecht@uke.de.
(2)Klinik und Poliklinik für Hals-, Nasen- und Ohrenheilkunde,
Kopf-Hals-Chirurgie und Onkologie; Kopf-Hals-Tumorzentrum des Universitären
Cancer Center Hamburg (UCCH), Universitätsklinikum Hamburg-Eppendorf,
Martinistrasse 52, 20246, Hamburg, Deutschland.

Treatment of patients with oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma (OPSCC) requires
interdisciplinary collaboration. Besides oncologic control, organ and function
preservation are important priorities. One treatment option is primary
concomitant chemoradiotherapy (CRT), particularly for locally advanced head and
neck cancer. Another option is sequential CRT, where induction chemotherapy may
be followed either by radiation alone or by CRT. An important aspect of these
modalities is the development of functional sequelae with regards to swallowing
as a direct consequence of radiogenic fibrosis, as well as tissue ctoxicity
associated with cisplatin-based chemotherapy. Conventional open surgical
approaches are being increasingly replaced by transoral surgical modalities with 
less treatment-related morbidity. As a further, equally important goal of
appropriately indicated surgery, adjuvant (C)RT may be omitted or the dose
significantly reduced. The advantages of primary surgery over primary CRT may be 
less obvious in cases still requiring adjuvant treatment, although not
necessarily completely eliminated. For patients with human papillomavirus
(HPV)-driven OPSCC, it is important to note that primary surgery may provide
comparable or even increased survival benefit. To date, there is no evidence for 
a clear advantage of primary CRT over primary surgery in this group. In these
cases, a de-escalated treatment package may be the preferred option. Here, the
application of radioimmunotherapy as well as a reduced radiation dose may
minimize long-term treatment-related morbidities.

DOI: 10.1007/s00106-016-0147-5 
PMID: 26992383  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
