

2383. Am J Case Rep. 2016 Jun 15;17:406-11.

A Patient Presenting with Tuberculous Encephalopathy and Human Immunodeficiency
Virus Infection.

Li J(1), Afroz S(2), French E(3), Mehta A(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Family Medicine, Brown University Family Medicine, Pawtucket,
RI, USA.
(2)Medicine Department, Mount Sinai St.Luke&#39;s, 1111 Amsterdam Ave, USA.
(3)Department of Psychiatry, Palm Beach Centre for Graduate Medical Education,
West Palm Beach, FL, USA.
(4)Department of Medicine, Nyack Hospital, Nyack, NY, USA.

BACKGROUND: In the USA, Mycobacterium tuberculosis infection is more likely to be
found in foreign-born individuals, and those co-infected with human
immunodeficiency virus (HIV) are more likely to have tuberculous meningitis. The 
literature is lacking in details about the clinical workup of patients presenting
with tuberculous meningitis with encephalopathic features who are co-infected
with HIV. This report demonstrates a clinical approach to diagnosis and
management of tuberculous meningitis.
CASE REPORT: A 33-year-old Ecuadorean man presented with altered consciousness
and constitutional symptoms. During the workup he was found to have tuberculous
meningitis with encephalopathic features and concurrent HIV infection. Early
evidence for tuberculosis meningitis included lymphocytic pleocytosis and a
positive interferon gamma release assay. A confirmatory diagnosis of systemic
infection was made based on lymph node biopsy. Imaging studies of the neck showed
scrofula and adenopathy, and brain imaging showed infarctions, exudates, and
communicating hydrocephalus. Treatment was started for tuberculous meningitis,
while anti-retroviral therapy for HIV was started 5 days later in combination
with prednisone, given the risk of immune reconstitution inflammatory syndrome
(IRIS).
CONCLUSIONS: A clinical picture consistent with tuberculous meningitis includes
constitutional symptoms, foreign birth, lymphocytic pleocytosis, specific
radiographic findings, and immunodeficiency. Workup for tuberculous meningitis
should include MRI, HIV screening, and cerebral spinal fluid analysis. It is
essential to treat co-infection with HIV and to assess for IRIS.


PMCID: PMC4917069
PMID: 27302013  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
