

2390. Laryngoscope. 2009 Aug;119(8):1542-9. doi: 10.1002/lary.20533.

Prognostic significance of human papillomavirus in oropharyngeal squamous cell
carcinomas.

Sedaghat AR(1), Zhang Z, Begum S, Palermo R, Best S, Ulmer KM, Levine M, Zinreich
E, Messing BP, Gold D, Wu AA, Niparko KJ, Kowalski J, Hirata RM, Saunders JR,
Westra WH, Pai SI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology/Head and Neck Surgery, The Johns Hopkins
University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland 21287, USA.

OBJECTIVES/HYPOTHESIS: The human papillomavirus (HPV) has been identified as a
causative factor in 20% to 25% of all head and neck squamous cell carcinomas
(HNSCC). Ongoing research suggests that the presence of HPV DNA in HNSCC predicts
a positive prognosis with respect to disease-free and overall survival. However, 
most studies have been limited by the heterogeneity in treatment regimens and/or 
anatomic subsites of tumor origin. In this study, we correlate clinical outcomes 
with HPV status for patients with oropharyngeal carcinomas who were uniformly
treated with a concurrent chemoradiation treatment protocol.
STUDY DESIGN: Retrospective study.
METHODS: Demographic and clinicopathologic parameters, including age at
diagnosis, gender, race, smoking and alcohol history, tumor stage and grade,
locoregional recurrence, metastatic spread, recurrence-free survival, overall
survival and disease-specific death, were obtained from medical charts and
established databases. These parameters were correlated with HPV status of the
tumors established by in situ hybridization analysis.
RESULTS: HPV positivity correlated with improved clinical outcomes regarding
locoregional control (P = .042), recurrence-free survival (P = .009), overall
survival (P = .017), and disease-specific death (P = .09). Advanced T stage was a
significant risk factor for recurrence and death independent of HPV status.
CONCLUSIONS: In patients with oropharyngeal carcinoma uniformly treated with
chemoradiation, the presence of HPV is a favorable prognostic indicator with
respect to recurrence and overall survival. However, advanced T stage was an
independent risk factor for recurrence and death that can to some degree offset
this benefit.

DOI: 10.1002/lary.20533 
PMID: 19522004  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
