

2398. Laryngorhinootologie. 2012 Mar;91 Suppl 1:S1-26. doi: 10.1055/s-0031-1297241.
Epub 2012 Mar 28.

[Basics of tumor development and importance of human papilloma virus (HPV) for
head and neck cancer].

[Article in German]

Wittekindt C(1), Wagner S, Mayer CS, Klußmann JP.

Author information: 
(1)Klinik für HNO-Heilkunde, Kopf-/Halschirurgie, Plastische Operationen,
Universitätsklinikum Gießen und Marburg GmbH, Standort Gießen.

Head and Neck Squamous Cell Carcinoma (HNSCC) are the 6th most common cancers
worldwide. While the incidence of larynx-hypopharynx carcinoma decreases,
actually an increase in oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC) is observed.
Classical risk factors for HNSCC are smoking and alcohol. Though, it was shown
recently for 25 to 60% of OSCC, to be associated with an infection by oncogenic
human papilloma virus (HPV). The development of "common" head-neck-tumors is
substantially enhanced by an accumulation of genetic changes, which lead to an
inactivation of tumor suppressor genes or to an activation of proto-oncogenes. A 
more or less uniform sequence of different DNA-damages leads to genetic
instability. In this context, an early and frequent event is deletion on the
short arm of chromosome 9, which results in inactivation of the p16-gene. On the 
contrary, for HPV-induced carcinogenesis, expression of the viral proteins E6 and
E7 is most important, since E6 and E7 lead to inactivation of the cellular
tumor-suppressor-proteins p53 and Rb. The process of natural transoral infection 
is not yet clear. However, as a matter of fact peroral HPV-infection is not
seldom and in most cases such an infection heals completely and uneventfully.
Smoking seems to increases the probability for developing an HPV-associated
tumor. The association of HNSCC with HPV can be proven with established methods
in clinical diagnostics. In addition to classical prognostic factors, diagnosis
of an HPV-association may become important for future therapies. Prognostic
relevance of HPV probably surmounts many known risk-factors, for instance
regional metastasis. Until now, no other molecular markers are established in
clinical routine. Future therapy concepts may vary for the two subgroups of
patients, especially patients with HPV-associated OSCC may take advantage of a
less aggressive postoperative treatment. Finally an outlook will be given on
possible target-aimed therapies, of which so far only antibodies against
EGF-receptors are established in clinical practice.

© Georg Thieme Verlag KG Stuttgart · New York.

DOI: 10.1055/s-0031-1297241 
PMID: 22456913  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
