

2405. Radiother Oncol. 2016 Dec;121(3):364-373. doi: 10.1016/j.radonc.2016.11.008. Epub
2016 Nov 29.

HPV status, cancer stem cell marker expression, hypoxia gene signatures and
tumour volume identify good prognosis subgroups in patients with HNSCC after
primary radiochemotherapy: A multicentre retrospective study of the German Cancer
Consortium Radiation Oncology Group (DKTK-ROG).

Linge A(1), Lohaus F(1), Löck S(2), Nowak A(3), Gudziol V(4), Valentini C(5), von
Neubeck C(6), Jütz M(7), Tinhofer I(8), Budach V(8), Sak A(9), Stuschke M(9),
Balermpas P(10), Rödel C(10), Grosu AL(11), Abdollahi A(12), Debus J(13),
Ganswindt U(14), Belka C(15), Pigorsch S(16), Combs SE(17), Mönnich D(18), Zips
D(18), Buchholz F(19), Aust DE(20), Baretton GB(20), Thames HD(21), Dubrovska
A(22), Alsner J(23), Overgaard J(23), Krause M(24), Baumann M(25); DKTK-ROG.

Author information: 
(1)German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg and German Cancer Consortium 
(DKTK), Dresden, Germany; Department of Radiation Oncology, Faculty of Medicine
and University Hospital Carl Gustav Carus, Technische Universität Dresden,
Germany; OncoRay - National Center for Radiation Research in Oncology, Faculty of
Medicine and University Hospital Carl Gustav Carus, Technische Universität
Dresden and Helmholtz-Zentrum Dresden - Rossendorf, Germany; National Center for 
Tumor Diseases (NCT), Partner Site Dresden, Germany.
(2)OncoRay - National Center for Radiation Research in Oncology, Faculty of
Medicine and University Hospital Carl Gustav Carus, Technische Universität
Dresden and Helmholtz-Zentrum Dresden - Rossendorf, Germany; National Center for 
Tumor Diseases (NCT), Partner Site Dresden, Germany.
(3)National Center for Tumor Diseases (NCT), Partner Site Dresden, Germany;
Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, Faculty of Medicine and University 
Hospital Carl Gustav Carus, Technische Universität Dresden, Germany.
(4)National Center for Tumor Diseases (NCT), Partner Site Dresden, Germany;
Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Faculty of Medicine and University Hospital
Carl Gustav Carus, Technische Universität Dresden, Germany.
(5)Department of Radiation Oncology, Faculty of Medicine and University Hospital 
Carl Gustav Carus, Technische Universität Dresden, Germany; OncoRay - National
Center for Radiation Research in Oncology, Faculty of Medicine and University
Hospital Carl Gustav Carus, Technische Universität Dresden and Helmholtz-Zentrum 
Dresden - Rossendorf, Germany; National Center for Tumor Diseases (NCT), Partner 
Site Dresden, Germany.
(6)German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg and German Cancer Consortium 
(DKTK), Dresden, Germany; OncoRay - National Center for Radiation Research in
Oncology, Faculty of Medicine and University Hospital Carl Gustav Carus,
Technische Universität Dresden and Helmholtz-Zentrum Dresden - Rossendorf,
Germany.
(7)OncoRay - National Center for Radiation Research in Oncology, Faculty of
Medicine and University Hospital Carl Gustav Carus, Technische Universität
Dresden and Helmholtz-Zentrum Dresden - Rossendorf, Germany.
(8)German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg and German Cancer Consortium 
(DKTK), Berlin, Germany; Department of Radiooncology and Radiotherapy, Charité
University Hospital, Berlin, Germany.
(9)German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg and German Cancer Consortium 
(DKTK), Essen, Germany; Department of Radiotherapy, Medical Faculty, University
of Duisburg-Essen, Germany.
(10)German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg and German Cancer Consortium
(DKTK), Frankfurt, Germany; Department of Radiotherapy and Oncology,
Goethe-University Frankfurt, Germany.
(11)German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg and German Cancer Consortium
(DKTK), Freiburg, Germany; Department of Radiation Oncology, University of
Freiburg, Germany.
(12)German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg and German Cancer Consortium
(DKTK), Heidelberg, Germany; Heidelberg Institute of Radiation Oncology (HIRO),
National Center for Radiation Research in Oncology (NCRO), University of
Heidelberg Medical School and German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Germany;
Heidelberg Ion Therapy Center (HIT), Department of Radiation Oncology, University
of Heidelberg Medical School, Germany; National Center for Tumor Diseases (NCT), 
University of Heidelberg Medical School and German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ),
Germany; Translational Radiation Oncology, University of Heidelberg Medical
School and German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Germany.
(13)German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg and German Cancer Consortium
(DKTK), Heidelberg, Germany; Heidelberg Institute of Radiation Oncology (HIRO),
National Center for Radiation Research in Oncology (NCRO), University of
Heidelberg Medical School and German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Germany;
Heidelberg Ion Therapy Center (HIT), Department of Radiation Oncology, University
of Heidelberg Medical School, Germany; National Center for Tumor Diseases (NCT), 
University of Heidelberg Medical School and German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ),
Germany; Clinical Cooperation Unit Radiation Oncology, University of Heidelberg
Medical School and German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Germany.
(14)Heidelberg Ion Therapy Center (HIT), Department of Radiation Oncology,
University of Heidelberg Medical School, Germany; Department of Radiation
Oncology, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität, Munich, Germany; Clinical Cooperation
Group, Personalized Radiotherapy in Head and Neck Cancer, Helmholtz Zentrum,
Munich, Germany.
(15)German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg and German Cancer Consortium
(DKTK), Munich, Germany; Heidelberg Ion Therapy Center (HIT), Department of
Radiation Oncology, University of Heidelberg Medical School, Germany; Department 
of Radiation Oncology, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität, Munich, Germany; Clinical 
Cooperation Group, Personalized Radiotherapy in Head and Neck Cancer, Helmholtz
Zentrum, Munich, Germany.
(16)German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg and German Cancer Consortium
(DKTK), Munich, Germany; Department of Radiation Oncology, Technische Universität
München, Germany.
(17)German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg and German Cancer Consortium
(DKTK), Munich, Germany; Department of Radiation Oncology, Technische Universität
München, Germany; Institute of Innovative Radiotherapy (iRT), Helmholtz Zentrum
München, Oberschleißheim, Germany.
(18)German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg and German Cancer Consortium
(DKTK), Tübingen, Germany; Department of Radiation Oncology, Faculty of Medicine 
and University Hospital Tübingen, Eberhard Karls Universität Tübingen, Germany.
(19)German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg and German Cancer Consortium
(DKTK), Dresden, Germany; National Center for Tumor Diseases (NCT), Partner Site 
Dresden, Germany; Medical Systems Biology, University Cancer Center (UCC),
University Hospital Carl Gustav Carus, Technische Universität Dresden, Germany.
(20)German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg and German Cancer Consortium
(DKTK), Dresden, Germany; National Center for Tumor Diseases (NCT), Partner Site 
Dresden, Germany; Institute of Pathology, Faculty of Medicine and University
Hospital Carl Gustav Carus, Technische Universität Dresden, Germany; Tumour- and 
Normal Tissue Bank, University Cancer Center (UCC), University Hospital Carl
Gustav Carus, Technische Universität Dresden, Germany.
(21)Department of Biostatistics, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston, USA.
(22)German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg and German Cancer Consortium
(DKTK), Dresden, Germany; OncoRay - National Center for Radiation Research in
Oncology, Faculty of Medicine and University Hospital Carl Gustav Carus,
Technische Universität Dresden and Helmholtz-Zentrum Dresden - Rossendorf,
Germany; Helmholtz-Zentrum Dresden - Rossendorf, Institute of Radiooncology,
Germany.
(23)Department of Experimental Clinical Oncology, Aarhus University Hospital,
Denmark.
(24)German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg and German Cancer Consortium
(DKTK), Dresden, Germany; Department of Radiation Oncology, Faculty of Medicine
and University Hospital Carl Gustav Carus, Technische Universität Dresden,
Germany; OncoRay - National Center for Radiation Research in Oncology, Faculty of
Medicine and University Hospital Carl Gustav Carus, Technische Universität
Dresden and Helmholtz-Zentrum Dresden - Rossendorf, Germany; National Center for 
Tumor Diseases (NCT), Partner Site Dresden, Germany; Helmholtz-Zentrum Dresden - 
Rossendorf, Institute of Radiooncology, Germany.
(25)German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg and German Cancer Consortium
(DKTK), Dresden, Germany; Department of Radiation Oncology, Faculty of Medicine
and University Hospital Carl Gustav Carus, Technische Universität Dresden,
Germany; OncoRay - National Center for Radiation Research in Oncology, Faculty of
Medicine and University Hospital Carl Gustav Carus, Technische Universität
Dresden and Helmholtz-Zentrum Dresden - Rossendorf, Germany; National Center for 
Tumor Diseases (NCT), Partner Site Dresden, Germany; Helmholtz-Zentrum Dresden - 
Rossendorf, Institute of Radiooncology, Germany. Electronic address:
Michael.Baumann@dkfz.de.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the impact of the tumour volume, HPV status, cancer
stem cell (CSC) marker expression and hypoxia gene signatures, as potential
markers of radiobiological mechanisms of radioresistance, in a contemporary
cohort of patients with locally advanced head and neck squamous cell carcinoma
(HNSCC), who received primary radiochemotherapy (RCTx).
MATERIALS AND METHODS: For 158 patients with locally advanced HNSCC of the oral
cavity, oropharynx or hypopharynx who were treated at six DKTK partner sites, the
impact of tumour volume, HPV DNA, p16 overexpression, p53 expression, CSC marker 
expression and hypoxia-associated gene signatures on outcome of primary RCTx was 
retrospectively analyzed. The primary endpoint of this study was loco-regional
control (LRC).
RESULTS: Univariate Cox regression revealed a significant impact of tumour
volume, p16 overexpression, and SLC3A2 and CD44 protein expression on LRC. The
tumour hypoxia classification showed a significant impact only for small tumours.
In multivariate analyses an independent correlation of tumour volume, SLC3A2
expression, and the 15-gene hypoxia signature with LRC was identified (CD44
protein n/a because of no event in the CD44-negative group). Logistic modelling
showed that inclusion of CD44 protein expression and p16 overexpression
significantly improved the performance to predict LRC at 2years compared to the
model with tumour volume alone.
CONCLUSIONS: Tumour volume, HPV status, CSC marker expression and hypoxia gene
signatures are potential prognostic biomarkers for patients with locally advanced
HNSCC, who were treated by primary RCTx. The study also supports that the
individual tumour volumes should generally be included in biomarker studies and
that panels of biomarkers are superior to individual parameters.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.radonc.2016.11.008 
PMID: 27913065  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
