

2412. Malawi Med J. 2015 Sep;27(3):79-87.

Review: Head and neck squamous cell carcinoma in sub-Saharan Africa.

Faggons CE(1), Mabedi C(2), Shores CG(1), Gopal S(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology/Head and Neck Surgery, University of North
Carolina, Chapel Hill, North Carolina, USA.
(2)Department of Surgery, Kamuzu Central Hospital, Lilongwe, Malawi.
(3)UNC Project-Malawi, Lilongwe, Malawi.

AIM: Review the literature from 1990 to 2013 to determine known anatomic sites,
risk factors, treatments, and outcomes of head and neck squamous cell carcinoma
(HNSCC) in sub-Saharan Africa.
METHODS: Using a systematic search strategy, literature pertaining to HNSCC in
sub-Saharan Africa was reviewed and patient demographics, anatomic sites,
histology, stage, treatment, and outcomes were abstracted. The contributions of
human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), human papillomavirus (HPV) and behavioural
risk factors to HNSCC in the region were assessed.
RESULTS: Of the 342 papers identified, 46 were utilized for review, including
8611 patients. In sub-Saharan Africa, the oropharyngeal/oral cavity was found to 
be the most common site, with 7750 cases (90% of all cases). Few papers
distinguished oropharyngeal from oral cavity, making identification of possible
HPV-associated oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) difficult. SCC of the 
nasopharynx, nasal cavity, or paranasal sinuses was identified in 410 patients
(4.8% of all cases). Laryngeal SCC was found in 385 patients (4.5% of all cases),
and only 66 patients (0.8% of all cases) with hypopharyngeal SCC were identified.
In 862 patients with data available, 43% used tobacco and 42% used alcohol, and
reported use varied widely and was more common in laryngeal SCC than that of the 
oropharyngeal/oral cavity. Toombak and kola nut use was reported to be higher in 
patients with HNSCC. Several papers reported HIV-positive patients with HNSCC,
but it was not possible to determine HNSCC prevalence in HIV-positive compared to
negative patients. Reports of treatment and outcomes were rare.
CONCLUSIONS: The oropharyngeal/oral cavity was by far the most commonly reported 
site of HNSCC reported in sub-Saharan Africa. The roles of risk factors in HNSCC 
incidence in sub-Saharan Africa were difficult to delineate from the available
studies, but a majority of patients did not use tobacco and alcohol.


PMCID: PMC4688867
PMID: 26715951  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
