
Conflict of interest statement: The authors of this article and the planning
committee members and staff have no relevant financial relationships with
commercial interests to disclose.


2435. HNO. 2016 Jul;64(7):450-9. doi: 10.1007/s00106-016-0123-0.

[Human papillomavirus and squamous cell cancer of the head and neck region :
Prognostic, therapeutic and prophylactic implications].

[Article in German]

Reuschenbach M(1)(2), Wagner S(3)(4), Würdemann N(3)(4), Sharma SJ(3)(4), Prigge 
ES(5)(3), Sauer M(5)(3), Wittig A(3)(6), Wittekindt C(3)(4), von Knebel Doeberitz
M(5)(3), Klussmann JP(3)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Abteilung für Angewandte Tumorbiologie, Institut für Pathologie,
Universitätsklinikum Heidelberg, Im Neuenheimer Feld 224, 69120, Heidelberg,
Deutschland. miriam.reuschenbach@med.uni-heidelberg.de.
(2)The Human Papillomavirus Infection and Oropharyngeal Cancer Consortium (HOCC),
. miriam.reuschenbach@med.uni-heidelberg.de.
(3)The Human Papillomavirus Infection and Oropharyngeal Cancer Consortium (HOCC).
(4)Klinik für HNO-Heilkunde, Kopf-, Halschirurgie, Universitätsklinikum Gießen,
Justus-Liebig-Universität Gießen, Gießen, Deutschland.
(5)Abteilung für Angewandte Tumorbiologie, Institut für Pathologie,
Universitätsklinikum Heidelberg, Im Neuenheimer Feld 224, 69120, Heidelberg,
Deutschland.
(6)Klinik für Strahlentherapie und Radioonkologie, Universitätsklinikum Gießen
und Marburg, Philipps-Universität Marburg, Marburg, Deutschland.

Human papilloma viruses (HPV) are responsible for approximately half of all
oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinomas (OPSCC) and incidence rates of
HPV-associated OPSCC continue to increase substantially. The defined viral
carcinogenesis permits development of specific diagnostic, therapeutic, and
prophylactic approaches. Laboratory identification of HPV-associated OPSCC may be
achieved by p16(INK4a) immunohistochemistry combined with HPV DNA detection by
polymerase chain reaction (PCR) using tumor tissue. Patients with HPV-associated 
OPSCC have a relatively good prognosis; therefore, the HPV status plays an
important role in patient guidance. Due to the relatively favorable prognosis,
ongoing studies are evaluating whether less rigorous therapy for HPV-positive
patients results in equally good cure rates. The criteria for patient selection
are, however, still uncertain. Particularly markers for detection of HPV-positive
patients with a high risk of treatment failure are lacking. Besides tumor stage
and comorbidities, distinct genomic, epigenetic, and immunologic alterations are 
prognostically relevant for HPV-associated OPSCC, and might be of predictive
value. Furthermore, the characteristic molecular alterations suggest the
possibility of novel vigilant and specific therapy approaches. These may be
inhibitors of the phosphatidylinositol 3‑kinase (PI3K) pathway, which is
frequently activated in HPV-associated OPSCC, and immunotherapeutic methods,
e. g., therapeutic vaccination. Although prophylactic HPV vaccinations may also
prevent development of HPV-associated OPSCC, foreseeable effects on OPSCC
incidence will be low, given the low vaccination rates in Germany. This
highlights the fact that interdisciplinary research networks should enhance the
necessary activities related to HPV-associated OPSCC.

DOI: 10.1007/s00106-016-0123-0 
PMID: 26864190  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
