

2472. Public Health Genomics. 2009;12(5-6):331-42. doi: 10.1159/000214923. Epub 2009
Aug 11.

Therapeutic human papillomavirus vaccination.

Albers AE(1), Kaufmann AM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery,
Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany.

Despite impressive progress in prevention and therapy of premalignant and
malignant dysplasia the worldwide burden of cancer is relatively unchanged.
Supplementation of the therapeutic arsenal by immunotherapeutic methods would
have the potential to make a significant impact. Dysplastic lesions and cancer of
the cervix show strong association with human papillomaviruses (HPV), as do
tumours of other mucosal epithelia like squamous cell carcinoma of the head and
neck. Such tumours are distinct from most other malignancies in that they harbour
foreign antigens derived from the virus. The expression of viral oncogenes is
necessary to maintain the cancerous phenotype. Therefore, these antigens are
unique to the tumour and very attractive targets for 'proof of concept' studies
in the development of therapeutic vaccines showing the general applicability of
tumour vaccination and prove the correlation of immune response and clinical
response. To date numerous clinical trials have been performed with candidate
vaccines predominantly for cervical cancer and its precursors. Although a
naturally induced anti-HPV T cell response in patients can be shown, the success 
of therapeutic vaccines has so far been limited. This can probably be attributed 
to immunosuppression, immunoselection and immunoediting of the tumour cells and
other, mostly unknown, factors of the individual contributing to the failure of
autonomous clearance of the infection. Overriding this failure, reversing
immunosuppression and application in early stages of the disease are the key
tasks for future development of therapeutic vaccines. This review will summarize 
the basis and recent developments of therapeutic vaccines and discuss obstacles
that hinder their success.

Copyright 2009 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000214923 
PMID: 19684445  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
