

2486. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2014 Nov;151(5):785-90. doi:
10.1177/0194599814549730. Epub 2014 Sep 9.

Low expression of nuclear Toll-like receptor 4 in laryngeal papillomas
transforming into squamous cell carcinoma.

Ilmarinen T(1), Hagström J(2), Haglund C(3), Auvinen E(4), Leivo I(5), Pitkäranta
A(6), Aaltonen LM(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Helsinki University
Hospital, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland taru.ilmarinen@helsinki.fi.
(2)Department of Pathology, Haartman Institute, Helsinki University Hospital,
University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland Helsinki University Hospital
Laboratory, Helsinki University Hospital, University of Helsinki, Helsinki,
Finland.
(3)Department of Pathology, Haartman Institute, Helsinki University Hospital,
University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland Department of Surgery, Helsinki
University Hospital, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland.
(4)Helsinki University Hospital Laboratory, Helsinki University Hospital,
University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland Department of Virology, Haartman
Institute, Helsinki University Hospital, University of Helsinki, Helsinki,
Finland.
(5)Department of Pathology, Turku University Hospital, University of Turku,
Turku, Finland.
(6)Department of Otorhinolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Helsinki University
Hospital, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland.

OBJECTIVE: The malignant transformation rate of recurrent respiratory
papillomatosis (RRP), a disease caused by human papillomavirus (HPV), has varied 
significantly. Cells of the human immune system express toll-like receptors
(TLRs) that recognize particles from viruses and bacteria; TLRs are also present 
on tumor cells, and down-regulation of TLRs has been shown during the progression
of HPV-associated neoplasia. The aim of this study was to determine the malignant
transformation rate of laryngeal papillomas (LPs) and analyze the potential of
TLR2, TLR4, and TLR9 immunoexpression as indicators of the increased cancer risk.
STUDY DESIGN: Retrospective case-control study.
SETTING: Department of Otorhinolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Helsinki
University Hospital, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland.
SUBJECTS AND METHODS: We reviewed all patients with RRP treated for LPs between
1975 and 2011. Data from the Finnish Cancer Registry confirmed the number of
patients diagnosed with laryngeal squamous cell carcinoma (LSCC). Laryngeal
tissue specimens from patients developing LSCC were subjected to TLR2, TLR4, and 
TLR9 immunohistochemistry. Nine patients with RRP without malignant
transformation and 19 patients with LSCC without a pre-existing LP served as
controls.
RESULTS: Nine of 324 patients (2.8%) with RRP developed LSCC. The intensity of
nuclear staining of TLR4 was significantly lower in LPs transforming into LSCC
than in LPs without malignant transformation. The expression of cytoplasmic TLR4 
in LSCC correlated with tumor grade and T stage. Cytoplasmic TLR9 expression was 
significantly lower in LPs than in LSCC.
CONCLUSION: The expression of TLR4 may serve as a predictive marker of malignant 
transformation in LPs. High immunoexpression of cytoplasmic TLR4 in LSCC was
associated with a more aggressive disease.

© American Academy of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery Foundation 2014.

DOI: 10.1177/0194599814549730 
PMID: 25205638  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
