

2497. Oral Oncol. 2014 Jan;50(1):19-26. doi: 10.1016/j.oraloncology.2013.10.003. Epub
2013 Oct 23.

Combination antiangiogenic therapy and radiation in head and neck cancers.

Hsu HW(1), Wall NR(2), Hsueh CT(3), Kim S(4), Ferris RL(4), Chen CS(5),
Mirshahidi S(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Loma Linda University, Loma Linda, CA, USA;
Department of Basic Sciences, Loma Linda University, Loma Linda, CA, USA; LLU
Cancer Center Biospecimen Laboratory, Loma Linda University, Loma Linda, CA, USA.
(2)Department of Basic Sciences, Loma Linda University, Loma Linda, CA, USA;
Department of Biochemistry, Loma Linda University, Loma Linda, CA, USA.
(3)Division of Oncology & Hematology, Loma Linda University, Loma Linda, CA, USA.
(4)Department of Otolaryngology, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, USA.
(5)Department of Medicine, Loma Linda University, Loma Linda, CA, USA; LLU Cancer
Center Biospecimen Laboratory, Loma Linda University, Loma Linda, CA, USA;
Division of Oncology & Hematology, Loma Linda University, Loma Linda, CA, USA.
(6)Department of Medicine, Loma Linda University, Loma Linda, CA, USA; Department
of Basic Sciences, Loma Linda University, Loma Linda, CA, USA; LLU Cancer Center 
Biospecimen Laboratory, Loma Linda University, Loma Linda, CA, USA. Electronic
address: smirshahidi@llu.edu.

Tumor angiogenesis is a hallmark of advanced cancers and promotes invasion and
metastasis. Over 90% of head and neck squamous cell carcinomas (HNSCC) express
angiogenic factors such as vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF). Several
preclinical studies support the prognostic implications of angiogenic markers for
HNSCC and currently this is an attractive treatment target in solid tumors. Since
radiotherapy is one of the most commonly used treatments for HNSCC, it is
imperative to identify the interactions between antiangiogenic therapy and
radiotherapy, and to develop combination therapy to improve clinical outcome. The
mechanisms between antiangiogenic agents and ionizing radiation are complicated
and involve many interactions between the vasculature, tumor stroma and tumor
cells. The proliferation and metastasis of tumor cells rely on angiogenesis/blood
vessel formation. Rapid growing tumors will cause hypoxia, which up-regulates
tumor cell survival factors, such as hypoxia-inducing factor-1α (HIF-1α) and
vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), giving rise to more tumor
proliferation, angiogenesis and increased radioresistance. Thus, agents that
target tumor vasculature and new tumor vessel formation can modulate the tumor
microenvironment to improve tumor blood flow and oxygenation, leading to enhanced
radiosensitivity. In this review, we discuss the mechanisms of how antiangiogenic
therapies improve tumor response to radiation and data that support this
combination strategy as a promising method for the treatment of HNSCC in the
future.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.oraloncology.2013.10.003 
PMID: 24269532  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
