

2503. Otol Neurotol. 2017 Jul;38(6):792-803. doi: 10.1097/MAO.0000000000001427.

Emerging Therapies for Sensorineural Hearing Loss.

Crowson MG(1), Hertzano R, Tucci DL.

Author information: 
(1)*Division of Head & Neck Surgery and Communication Sciences, Department of
Surgery, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, North Carolina †Department of
Otorhinolaryngology-Head & Neck Surgery, Anatomy and Neurobiology and Institute
for Genome Sciences, University of Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore,
Maryland.

OBJECTIVE: To critically review and evaluate the proposed mechanisms and
documented results of the therapeutics currently in active clinical drug trials
for the treatment of sensorineural hearing loss.
DATA SOURCES: US National Institutes of Health (NIH) Clinical Trials registry,
MEDLINE/PubMed.
STUDY SELECTION & DATA EXTRACTION: A review of the NIH Clinical Trials registry
identified candidate hearing loss therapies, and supporting publications were
acquired from MEDLINE/PubMed. Proof-of-concept, therapeutic mechanisms, and
clinical outcomes were critically appraised.
DATA SYNTHESIS: Twenty-two active clinical drug trials registered in the United
States were identified, and six potentially therapeutic molecules were reviewed. 
Of the six molecules reviewed, four comprised mechanisms pertaining to mitigating
oxidative stress pathways that presumably lead to inner ear cell death. One
remaining therapy sought to manipulate the cell death cascade, and the last
remaining therapy was a novel cell replacement therapy approach to introduce a
transcription factor that promotes hair cell regeneration.
CONCLUSION: A common theme in recent clinical trials registered in the United
States appears to be the targeting of cell death pathways and influence of
oxidant stressors on cochlear sensory neuroepithelium. In addition, a
virus-delivered cell replacement therapy would be the first of its kind should it
prove safe and efficacious. Significant challenges for bringing these
bench-to-bedside therapies to market remain. It is never assured that results in 
non-human animal models translate to effective therapies in the setting of human 
biology. Moreover, as additional processes are described in association with
hearing loss, such as an immune response and loss of synaptic contacts,
additional pathways for targeting become available.

DOI: 10.1097/MAO.0000000000001427 
PMCID: PMC5465007
PMID: 28383465  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
