

2514. Oncotarget. 2015 Apr 20;6(11):9045-60.

Antibody and lectin target podoplanin to inhibit oral squamous carcinoma cell
migration and viability by distinct mechanisms.

Ochoa-Alvarez JA(1), Krishnan H(1), Pastorino JG(1), Nevel E(1), Kephart D(1),
Lee JJ(1), Retzbach EP(1), Shen Y(1), Fatahzadeh M(2), Baredes S(3), Kalyoussef
E(3), Honma M(4), Adelson ME(5), Kaneko MK(6), Kato Y(6), Young MA(1),
Deluca-Rapone L(1), Shienbaum AJ(1), Yin K(1), Jensen LD(7), Goldberg GS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Molecular Biology, Cell Biology, and Pathology, School of
Osteopathic Medicine, Rowan University, Stratford, NJ, USA.
(2)Department of Diagnostic Sciences, Rutgers School of Dental Medicine, Newark, 
NJ, USA.
(3)Department of Otolaryngology - Head and Neck Surgery, Rutgers New Jersey
Medical School, Newark, NJ, USA.
(4)Department of Dermatology, Asahikawa Medical University, Midorigaoka-Higashi, 
Asahikawa, Japan.
(5)Medical Diagnostic Laboratories, Hamilton, NJ, USA.
(6)Department of Regional Innovation, Tohoku University Graduate School of
Medicine, Seiryo-machi, Aoba-ku, Sendai, Miyagi, Japan.
(7)Department of Medical and Health Sciences, Linköping University,
Lasarettsgatan, Ingång, Linköping, Sweden.

Podoplanin (PDPN) is a unique transmembrane receptor that promotes tumor cell
motility. Indeed, PDPN may serve as a chemotherapeutic target for primary and
metastatic cancer cells, particularly oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC) cells
that cause most oral cancers. Here, we studied how a monoclonal antibody (NZ-1)
and lectin (MASL) that target PDPN affect human OSCC cell motility and viability.
Both reagents inhibited the migration of PDPN expressing OSCC cells at nanomolar 
concentrations before inhibiting cell viability at micromolar concentrations. In 
addition, both reagents induced mitochondrial membrane permeability transition to
kill OSCC cells that express PDPN by caspase independent nonapoptotic necrosis.
Furthermore, MASL displayed a surprisingly robust ability to target PDPN on OSCC 
cells within minutes of exposure, and significantly inhibited human OSCC
dissemination in zebrafish embryos. Moreover, we report that human OSCC cells
formed tumors that expressed PDPN in mice, and induced PDPN expression in
infiltrating host murine cancer associated fibroblasts. Taken together, these
data suggest that antibodies and lectins may be utilized to combat OSCC and other
cancers that express PDPN.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.3515 
PMCID: PMC4496201
PMID: 25826087  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
