

2515. J Laryngol Otol. 2016 May;130(S2):S9-S12.

Aetiology and risk factors for head and neck cancer: United Kingdom National
Multidisciplinary Guidelines.

Shaw R(1), Beasley N(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Clinical Cancer Medicine,Institute of
Translational Medicine,University of Liverpool,Aintree University Hospitals NHS
Foundation Trust,Liverpool,UK.
(2)Department of Otolaryngology - Head and Neck Surgery,Nottingham University
Hospitals NHS Trust,Nottingham,UK.

This is the official guideline endorsed by the specialty associations involved in
the care of head and neck cancer patients in the UK. It discusses the aetiology
and risk factors for head and neck cancer and the recommended interventions
appropriate for each risk factor. Recommendations • Recent evidence synthesis
from National Institute for Health and Care Excellence suggests that the
following brief interventions for smoking cessation work should be used: ○ Ask
smokers how interested they are in quitting (R) ○ If they want to stop, refer
them to an intensive support service such as National Health Service Stop Smoking
Services (R) ○ If they are unwilling or unable to accept a referral, offer a stop
smoking aid, e.g. pharmacotherapy. (R) • Brief interventions are effective for
hazardous and harmful drinking. (R) • Specialist interventions are effective in
people with alcohol dependence. (R) • Most people with alcohol dependence can
undergo medically assisted withdrawal safely at home, after risk assessment. (R) 
• Management of leukoplakia is not informed by high-level evidence but consensus 
supports targeted use of biopsy and histopathological assessment. (R) • The
management of biopsy proven dysplastic lesions favours: ○ advice to reduce known 
environmental carcinogens such as tobacco and alcohol (R) ○ surgical excision
when the size of the lesions and the patient's function allows (R) ○ long-term
surveillance. (R) • Fanconi anaemia patients should: ○ be followed up in a
multidisciplinary specialist Fanconi anaemia clinic (G) ○ have quarterly
screening for head and neck squamous cell carcinoma and an aggressive biopsy
policy (G) ○ receive prophylactic vaccination against high risk human papilloma
virus (G) ○ receive treatment for head and neck squamous cell carcinoma with
surgery alone where possible. (G).

DOI: 10.1017/S0022215116000360 
PMCID: PMC4873944
PMID: 27841107  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
