

2520. J Transl Med. 2014 Jan 6;12:3. doi: 10.1186/1479-5876-12-3.

Methods and matrices: approaches to identifying miRNAs for nasopharyngeal
carcinoma.

Plieskatt JL, Rinaldi G, Feng Y, Levine PH, Easley S, Martinez E, Hashmi S,
Sadeghi N, Brindley PJ, Bethony JM(1), Mulvenna JP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Tropical Medicine, School of
Medicine and Health Science, George Washington University, Washington, DC, USA.
jbethony@gwu.edu.

BACKGROUND: Nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC) is a solid tumor of the head and neck.
Multimodal therapy is highly effective when NPC is detected early. However, due
to the location of the tumor and the absence of clinical signs, early detection
is difficult, making a biomarker for the early detection of NPC a priority. The
dysregulation of small non-coding RNAs (miRNAs) during carcinogenesis is the
focus of much current biomarker research. Herein, we examine several miRNA
discovery methods using two sample matrices to identify circulating miRNAs
(c-miRNAs) associated with NPC.
METHODS: We tested two miRNA discovery workflows on two sample sources for miRNAs
associated with NPC. In the first workflow, we assumed that NPC tumor tissue
would be enriched for miRNAs, so we compared miRNA expression in FFPE from NPC
cases and controls using microarray and RNA-Seq technologies. Candidate miRNAs
from both technologies were verified by qPCR in FFPE and sera from an independent
NPC sample set. In a second workflow, we directly interrogated NPC case and
control sera by RNA-Seq for c-miRNAs associated with NPC, with candidate c-miRNAs
verified by qPCR in the sera from the same independent NPC sample set.
RESULTS: Both microarray and RNA-Seq narrowed the miRNA signature to 1-5% of the 
known mature human miRNAs. Moreover, these two methods produced similar results
when applied to the same sample type (FFPE), with RNA-Seq additionally indicating
"unknown" miRNAs associated with NPC. However, we found different miRNA profiles 
in NPC sera compared to FFPE using RNA-Seq, with the few overlapping miRNAs found
to be significantly up-regulated in FFPE significantly down-regulated in sera
(and vice versa). Despite the different miRNA profiles found in FFPE and sera,
both profiles strongly associated with NPC, providing two potential sources for
biomarker signatures for NPC.
CONCLUSIONS: We determined that the direct interrogation of sera by RNA-Seq was
the most informative method for identifying a c-miRNA signature associated with
NPC. We also showed that there are different miRNA expression profiles associated
with NPC for tumor tissue and sera. These results reflect on the methods and
meaning of miRNA biomarkers for NPC in tissue and peripheral blood.

DOI: 10.1186/1479-5876-12-3 
PMCID: PMC3895762
PMID: 24393330  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
