
Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest statement: A patent
involving A.E., C.P., and S.S. (PCT/EP2016/053613) has been deposited by the
Institut Pasteur, INSERM, and CNRS.


2532. Am Soc Clin Oncol Educ Book. 2014:154-9. doi: 10.14694/EdBook_AM.2014.34.154.

Surgery in the HPV era: the role of robotics and microsurgical techniques.

Ridge JA(1).

Author information: 
(1)From the Head and Neck Surgery Section, Department of Surgical Oncology, Fox
Chase Cancer Center, Philadelphia, PA.

Retrospective studies suggested that head and neck cancers associated with human 
papilloma virus (HPV) are more frequently cured than those caused by substance
use. The Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG) subsequently confirmed the
observation in a prospective trial. Most HPV-initiated cancers arise in the
oropharynx. Survival differences between patients with cancers caused by HPV and 
those caused by alcohol and tobacco use persist despite modern treatment. The
impression that treatment intensification has resulted in improved survivorship
may well be attributable to an increasing proportion of patients with cancers
caused by HPV infection. Unsatisfactory results for cancers attributable to
substance use and encouraging improvements in tumor control for patients with
HPV-initiated cancers have led to dissatisfaction with the current nonsurgical
management paradigm. Ongoing advances in surgical techniques permit transoral
resection of oropharyngeal cancers, thus limiting exposure-related morbidity and 
permitting ready recovery in terms of speech and swallowing. Transoral laser
microsurgery (TLM) is increasingly employed and transoral robotic surgery (TORS) 
has dramatically popularized surgical treatment of oropharyngeal cancers.
Resection affords the opportunity to increase local control at the primary site
and surgical management of neck allows risk-based stratification of postoperative
radiation therapy. Case series from several institutions show encouraging
results. Transoral surgical resection is safe, can be undertaken with acceptable 
morbidity, and provides comparable locoregional control to that achieved with
chemoradiation. Prospective trials for patients with HPV-initiated cancers, as
well as those referable to substance use, are underway.

DOI: 10.14694/EdBook_AM.2014.34.154 
PMID: 24857072  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
