

2552. J Laryngol Otol. 2016 May;130(S2):S181-S190.

Recurrent head and neck cancer: United Kingdom National Multidisciplinary
Guidelines.

Mehanna H(1), Kong A(2), Ahmed SK(3).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Head and Neck Studies and Education,College of Medical and Dental
Sciences,University Hospital Birmingham,Heart of England NHS Foundation Trust,UK.
(2)Institute of Head and Neck Studies and Education,University of Birmingham,UK.
(3)University Hospital Birmingham,UK.

This is the official guideline endorsed by the specialty associations involved in
the care of head and neck cancer patients in the UK. Recurrent cancers present
some of the most challenging management issues in head and neck surgical and
oncological practice. This is rendered even more complex by the poor evidence
base to support management options, the substantial implications that treatments 
can have on the function and quality of life, and the difficult decision-making
considerations for supportive care alone. This paper provides consensus
recommendations on the management of recurrent head and neck cancer.
Recommendations • Consider baseline and serial scanning with computed tomography 
and/or magnetic resonance (CT and/or MR) to detect recurrence in high-risk
patients. (R) • Patients with head and neck cancer recurrence being considered
for active curative treatment should undergo assessment by positron emission
tomography combined with computed tomography (PET-CT) scan. (R) • Patients with
recurrence should be assessed systematically by a team experienced in the range
of management options available for recurrence including surgical salvage,
re-irradiation, chemotherapy and palliative care. (R) • Management of patients
with laryngeal recurrence should include input from surgeons with experience in
transoral surgery and partial laryngectomy for recurrence. (G) • Expertise in
transoral surgery and partial laryngectomy for recurrence should be concentrated 
to a few surgeons within each multidisciplinary teams. (G) • Transoral or open
partial laryngectomy should be offered as definitive treatment modality for
highly-selected patients with recurrent laryngeal cancer. (R) • Patients with OPC
recurrence should have p16 human papilloma virus status assessed. (R) • Patients 
with OPC recurrence should be considered for salvage surgical treatment by an
experienced team, with reconstructive expertise input. (G) • Transoral surgery
appears to be an effective alternative to open surgery for the management of OPC 
recurrence in carefully selected patients. (R) • Consider elective selective neck
dissections in patients with recurrent primaries with N0 necks, especially in
advanced cases. (R) • Selective neck dissection (with preservation of nodal
levels, especially level V, that are not involved by disease) in patients with
nodal (N+) recurrence appears to be as effective as modified or radical neck
dissections. (R) • Use salivary bypass tubes following salvage laryngectomy. (R) 
• Use interposition muscle-only pectoralis major or free flap for suture line
reinforcement if performing primary closure following salvage laryngectomy. (R) •
Use inlaid pedicled or free flap to close wound if there is tension at the
anastomosis following laryngectomy. (R) • Perform secondary puncture in post
chemoradiotherapy laryngectomy patients. (R) • Triple therapy with platinum,
cetuximab and 5-fluorouracil (5-FU) appears to provide the best outcomes for the 
management of patients with recurrence who have a good performance status and are
fit to receive it. If not fit, then combinations of platinum and cetuximab or
platinum and 5-FU may be considered. (R) • Patients with non-resectable recurrent
disease should be offered the opportunity to participate in phases I-III clinical
trials of new therapeutic agents. (R) • Chemo re-irradiation appears to improve
locoregional control, and may have some benefit for overall survival, at the risk
of considerable acute and late toxicity. Benefit must be weighed carefully
against risks, and patients must be counselled appropriately. (R) • Target
volumes should be kept tight and elective nodal irradiation should be avoided.
(R) • Best supportive care should be offered routinely as part of the management 
package of all patients with recurrent cancer even in the case of those who are
being treated curatively. (R).

DOI: 10.1017/S002221511600061X 
PMCID: PMC4873924
PMID: 27841130  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
