

2555. Psychooncology. 2015 Nov;24(11):1506-13. doi: 10.1002/pon.3760. Epub 2015 Jan 28.

Distancing, self-esteem, and subjective well-being in head and neck cancer.

Devins GM(1), Wong JC(2), Payne AY(2), Lebel S(3), Lee RN(4), Mah K(5), Irish
J(1), Rodin G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Princess Margaret Cancer Center and University of Toronto, Canada.
(2)University of Toronto, Canada.
(3)University of Ottawa, Canada.
(4)McMaster University Medical Centre and McMaster University, Canada.
(5)Princess Margaret Cancer Center, Canada.

BACKGROUND: Distancing (i.e. construing oneself as dissimilar to a
negatively-stereotyped group) preserves self-esteem and may benefit other domains
of subjective well-being. Head and neck cancer (HNC) is stigmatized because major
risk factors include avoidable lifestyle variables (smoking, alcohol consumption,
and human papilloma virus). Because the benefits of coping efforts, such as
distancing, are most evident when people are under stress, we hypothesize that
the psychosocial benefits of distancing will be most pronounced when cancer and
its treatment interfere substantially with participation in valued activities and
interests (i.e. high illness intrusiveness).
OBJECTIVE: To test whether distancing preserves self-esteem and other domains of 
subjective well-being (SWB) in HNC, especially when illness intrusiveness is
high.
METHODS: Five hundred and twenty-two HNC outpatients completed a
semantic-differential measure of perceived similarity to the 'cancer patient' and
measures of illness intrusiveness, self-esteem, depressive symptoms, and
psychological well-being in structured interviews. Evaluations of the 'cancer
patient' reflected cancer stereotypes.
RESULTS: A statistically significant interaction supported the central
hypothesis: When people held negative stereotypes, those who construed themselves
as similar to the 'cancer patient' reported lower self-esteem than those who
construed themselves as dissimilar. Distancing did not benefit other SWB
variables. Some results were counter-intuitive: e.g. Emotional distress increased
with increasing illness intrusiveness when people did not hold negative cancer
stereotypes, but when they held highly negative stereotypes, distress decreased
with increasing illness intrusiveness.
CONCLUSIONS: Overall, distancing preserved self-esteem in people with HNC and was
associated with benefits in other SWB domains.

Copyright © 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/pon.3760 
PMID: 25631628  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
