

2565. Cancer Prev Res (Phila). 2015 Mar;8(3):197-207. doi:
10.1158/1940-6207.CAPR-14-0348. Epub 2015 Feb 13.

Prevention of tumor growth driven by PIK3CA and HPV oncogenes by targeting mTOR
signaling with metformin in oral squamous carcinomas expressing OCT3.

Madera D(1), Vitale-Cross L(1), Martin D(1), Schneider A(2), Molinolo AA(1),
Gangane N(3), Carey TE(4), McHugh JB(4), Komarck CM(4), Walline HM(4), William WN
Jr(5), Seethala RR(6), Ferris RL(7), Gutkind JS(8).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Carcinogenesis Section, Oral and Pharyngeal Cancer Branch, National 
Institute of Dental and Craniofacial Research, NIH, Bethesda, Maryland.
(2)Department of Oncology and Diagnostic Sciences, School of Dentistry and
Greenebaum Cancer Center, Program in Oncology, University of Maryland, Baltimore,
Maryland.
(3)Department of Pathology, Mahatma Gandhi Institute of Medical Sciences, Wardha,
Maharashtra, India.
(4)Department of Otolaryngology-Head Neck Surgery, and the Head and Neck SPORE
Tissue Core, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan.
(5)Department of Thoracic/Head and Neck Medical Oncology, The University of Texas
MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas.
(6)University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, Pathology Program, Pittsburgh,
Philadelphia.
(7)Otolaryngology, Immunology, Cancer Immunology Program, University of
Pittsburgh School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, Philadelphia.
(8)Molecular Carcinogenesis Section, Oral and Pharyngeal Cancer Branch, National 
Institute of Dental and Craniofacial Research, NIH, Bethesda, Maryland.
sg39v@nih.gov.

Most squamous cell carcinomas of the head and neck (HNSCC) exhibit a persistent
activation of the PI3K-mTOR signaling pathway. We have recently shown that
metformin, an oral antidiabetic drug that is also used to treat lipodystrophy in 
HIV-infected (HIV(+)) individuals, diminishes mTOR activity and prevents the
progression of chemically induced experimental HNSCC premalignant lesions. Here, 
we explored the preclinical activity of metformin in HNSCCs harboring PIK3CA
mutations and HPV oncogenes, both representing frequent HNSCC alterations, aimed 
at developing effective targeted preventive strategies. The biochemical and
biologic effects of metformin were evaluated in representative HNSCC cells
expressing mutated PIK3CA or HPV oncogenes (HPV(+)). The oral delivery of
metformin was optimized to achieve clinical relevant blood levels. Molecular
determinants of metformin sensitivity were also investigated, and their
expression levels were examined in a large collection of HNSCC cases. We found
that metformin inhibits mTOR signaling and tumor growth in HNSCC cells expressing
mutated PIK3CA and HPV oncogenes, and that these activities require the
expression of organic cation transporter 3 (OCT3/SLC22A3), a metformin uptake
transporter. Coexpression of OCT3 and the mTOR pathway activation marker pS6 were
observed in most HNSCC cases, including those arising in HIV(+) patients.
Activation of the PI3K-mTOR pathway is a widespread event in HNSCC, including
HPV(-) and HPV(+) lesions arising in HIV(+) patients, all of which coexpress
OCT3. These observations may provide a rationale for the clinical evaluation of
metformin to halt HNSCC development from precancerous lesions, including in
HIV(+) individuals at risk of developing HPV(-) associated cancers.

©2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

DOI: 10.1158/1940-6207.CAPR-14-0348 
PMCID: PMC4355306
PMID: 25681087  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
