

2572. Int J Cancer. 2016 Jan 1;138(1):98-109. doi: 10.1002/ijc.29691. Epub 2015 Aug 28.

Phylogenetic analysis of multiple FISH markers in oral tongue squamous cell
carcinoma suggests that a diverse distribution of copy number changes is
associated with poor prognosis.

Wangsa D(1)(2), Chowdhury SA(3)(4), Ryott M(5), Gertz EM(6), Elmberger G(7), Auer
G(2), Åvall Lundqvist E(2)(8), Küffer S(9), Ströbel P(9), Schäffer AA(6),
Schwartz R(4)(10), Munck-Wikland E(11), Ried T(1), Heselmeyer-Haddad K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Genetics Branch, Center For Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD.
(2)Department of Oncology-Pathology, Karolinska Institutet, Karolinska University
Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden.
(3)Joint Carnegie Mellon/University of Pittsburgh Ph.D. Program In Computational 
Biology, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA.
(4)Computational Biology Department, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA.
(5)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Sophiahemmet Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden.
(6)Computational Biology Branch, National Center For Biotechnology Information,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD.
(7)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Pathology, Örebro University Hospital,
Örebro, Sweden.
(8)Department of Oncology And Department Of Clinical And Experimental Medicine,
Linköping University, Linköping, Sweden.
(9)Institute of Pathology, University Medical Center Göttingen, Göttingen,
Germany.
(10)Department of Biological Sciences, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh,
PA.
(11)Department of Oto-Rhino-Laryngology, Head And Neck Surgery, Karolinska
University Hospital and Department of Clinical Science, Intervention and
Technology, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.

Oral tongue squamous cell carcinoma (OTSCC) is associated with poor prognosis. To
improve prognostication, we analyzed four gene probes (TERC, CCND1, EGFR and
TP53) and the centromere probe CEP4 as a marker of chromosomal instability, using
fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) in single cells from the tumors of
sixty-five OTSCC patients (Stage I, n = 15; Stage II, n = 30; Stage III, n = 7;
Stage IV, n = 13). Unsupervised hierarchical clustering of the FISH data
distinguished three clusters related to smoking status. Copy number increases of 
all five markers were found to be correlated to non-smoking habits, while smokers
in this cohort had low-level copy number gains. Using the phylogenetic modeling
software FISHtrees, we constructed models of tumor progression for each patient
based on the four gene probes. Then, we derived test statistics on the models
that are significant predictors of disease-free and overall survival, independent
of tumor stage and smoking status in multivariate analysis. The patients whose
tumors were modeled as progressing by a more diverse distribution of copy number 
changes across the four genes have poorer prognosis. This is consistent with the 
view that multiple genetic pathways need to become deregulated in order for
cancer to progress.

Published 2015. This article is a U.S. Government work and is in the public
domain in the USA.

DOI: 10.1002/ijc.29691 
PMCID: PMC4823771
PMID: 26175310  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
