

2576. Clinics (Sao Paulo). 2018 Aug 20;73(suppl 1):e476s. doi:
10.6061/clinics/2018/e476s.

Improving adenoviral vectors and strategies for prostate cancer gene therapy.

Tamura RE(1), de Luna IV(1), Lana MG(1), Strauss BE(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratório de Vetores Virais, Centro de Investigação Translacional em
Oncologia, Instituto do Cancer do Estado de Sao Paulo (ICESP), Hospital das
Clinicas HCFMUSP, Faculdade de Medicina, Universidade de Sao Paulo, Sao Paulo,
SP, BR.

Gene therapy has been evaluated for the treatment of prostate cancer and includes
the application of adenoviral vectors encoding a suicide gene or oncolytic
adenoviruses that may be armed with a functional transgene. In parallel, versions
of adenoviral vector expressing the p53 gene (Ad-p53) have been tested as
treatments for head and neck squamous cell carcinoma and non-small cell lung
cancer. Although Ad-p53 gene therapy has yielded some interesting results when
applied to prostate cancer, it has not been widely explored, perhaps due to
current limitations of the approach. To achieve better functionality,
improvements in the gene transfer system and the therapeutic regimen may be
required. We have developed adenoviral vectors whose transgene expression is
controlled by a p53-responsive promoter, which creates a positive feedback
mechanism when used to drive the expression of p53. Together with improvements
that permit efficient transduction, this new approach was more effective than the
use of traditional versions of Ad-p53 in killing prostate cancer cell lines and
inhibiting tumor progression. Even so, gene therapy is not expected to replace
traditional chemotherapy but should complement the standard of care. In fact,
chemotherapy has been shown to assist in viral transduction and transgene
expression. The cooperation between gene therapy and chemotherapy is expected to 
effectively kill tumor cells while permitting the use of reduced chemotherapy
drug concentrations and, thus, lowering side effects. Therefore, the combination 
of gene therapy and chemotherapy may prove essential for the success of both
approaches.

DOI: 10.6061/clinics/2018/e476s 
PMCID: PMC6097088
PMID: 30133562  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
