

2588. Eur Rev Med Pharmacol Sci. 2014;18(17):2435-43.

Saikosaponin-d inhibits proliferation of human undifferentiated thyroid carcinoma
cells through induction of apoptosis and cell cycle arrest.

Liu RY(1), Li JP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology Head and Neck Surgery, Shanghai International
Medical Center, Shanghai, China. lijpingljp@126.com.

OBJECTIVE: Saikosaponin-d is a triterpene saponin derived from Bupleurum
falcatum. L and has been reported to exhibit a variety of pharmacological
activities such as anti-bacterial, anti-virus and anti-cancer. The aim of the
present study was to explore the effect of saikosaponin-d on the proliferation
and apoptosis of human undifferentiated thyroid carcinoma.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Three human anaplastic thyroid cancers cell lines were
cultured in the presence of saikosaponin-d and their proliferation was measured
by MTT assay. Cell apoptosis and cell cycle distribution were analyzed with flow 
cytometry. Western blot was performed to determine the proteins expression. The
in vivo effect of saikosaponin-d was measured with an animal model.
RESULTS: In vitro, MTT assay showed that saikosaponin-d treatment inhibited cell 
proliferation in three human anaplastic thyroid cancers cell lines ARO, 8305C and
SW1736. In addition, saikosaponin-d promoted cell apoptosis and induced G1-phase 
cell cycle arrest as shown by flow cytometric analysis. On the molecular level,
our results showed that saikosaponin-d treatment increased the expression of p53 
and bax, and decreased the expression of Bcl-2. In addition, saikosaponin-d
administration led to a significant up-regulation of p21 and down-regulation of
CDK2 and cyclin D1. Xenografts tumorigenesis model demonstrated that
saikosaponin-d markedly reduced the weight and volume of thyroid tumors in vivo.
CONCLUSIONS: The present study suggested that saikosaponin-d might be a new
potent chemopreventive drug candidate for human undifferentiated thyroid
carcinoma through induction of apoptosis and cell cycle arrest.


PMID: 25268087  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
