

2600. Zhonghua Xin Xue Guan Bing Za Zhi. 2010 Feb;38(2):147-51.

[Throat infection, neck spinal disease, chest pain and cardiac response: a new
clinical syndrome?].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhou CQ(1), Yan JT, Fan Q, Li ZY, Cianflone K, Wang DW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, Tongji Hospital of Tongji Medical College, Huazhong 
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430030, China.

OBJECTIVE: To analyze the characteristics of a new clinical syndrome, including
throat infection, neck spinal disease, chest pain and cardiac response.
METHODS: A total of 165 patients with above mentioned symptoms admitted to Tongji
hospital from 2003 to 2005 were included in this study and underwent further
medical history inquiry, physical examination and laboratory tests. Eighty-five
healthy subjects served as controls. Serum myocardial auto-antibodies against
beta(1)-adrenoceptor, alpha-myosin heavy chain, M(2)-muscarinic receptor and
adenine-nucleotide translocator were detected, inflammatory cytokines, high
sensitivity C-reaction protein, serum antibodies against Coxsackie virus-B,
cytomegalovirus, Mycoplasma pneumoniae and Chlamydia pneumoniae were determined
and lymphocyte subclasses were assayed by flow cytometry.
RESULTS: All patients had a complex of four symptoms or tetralogy: (1) persistent
throat or upper respiratory tract infection; (2) neck pain; (3) chest pain; (4)
chest depression or dyspnea, some of them with anxiety. Anti-myocardial
auto-antibodies (AMCA) were present in all patients vs. 8% in controls.
TNF-alpha, IL-1 and IL-6 were significantly higher in patients than controls (P <
0.01). CD3(+) and CD4(-)CD8(+) lymphocytes were significantly higher and CD56(+) 
lymphocytes lower in patients than those in controls (P < 0.01). The ratios of
serum pathogen antibodies positive against Coxsackie virus-B, cytomegalovirus,
Mycoplasma pneumoniae and Chlamydia pneumoniae were all significantly higher in
patients than in controls.
CONCLUSIONS: These data led to identification of a persistent respiratory
infection-related clinical syndrome, including persistent throat infection, neck 
spinal lesion, rib cartilage inflammation, symptoms of cardiac depression and
dyspnea with or without anxiety.


PMID: 20398562  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
