

2605. Radiother Oncol. 2014 Dec;113(3):317-23. doi: 10.1016/j.radonc.2014.11.011. Epub 
2014 Dec 2.

HPV16 DNA status is a strong prognosticator of loco-regional control after
postoperative radiochemotherapy of locally advanced oropharyngeal carcinoma:
results from a multicentre explorative study of the German Cancer Consortium
Radiation Oncology Group (DKTK-ROG).

Lohaus F(1), Linge A(1), Tinhofer I(2), Budach V(2), Gkika E(3), Stuschke M(3),
Balermpas P(4), Rödel C(5), Avlar M(6), Grosu AL(7), Abdollahi A(8), Debus J(9), 
Bayer C(10), Belka C(11), Pigorsch S(12), Combs SE(12), Mönnich D(13), Zips
D(13), von Neubeck C(14), Baretton GB(15), Löck S(16), Thames HD(17), Krause
M(18), Baumann M(19); DKTK-ROG.

Author information: 
(1)German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany and German Cancer
Consortium (DKTK) partner sites: Dresden, Germany; Department of Radiation
Oncology, Faculty of Medicine and University Hospital Carl Gustav Carus,
Technische Universität Dresden, Germany; OncoRay - National Center for Radiation 
Research in Oncology, Faculty of Medicine and University Hospital Carl Gustav
Carus, Technische Universität Dresden, Germany.
(2)German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany and German Cancer
Consortium (DKTK) partner sites: Berlin, Germany; Department of Radiooncology and
Radiotherapy, Charité University Hospital, Berlin, Germany.
(3)German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany and German Cancer
Consortium (DKTK) partner sites: Essen, Germany; Department of Radiotherapy,
Medical Faculty, University of Duisburg-Essen, Essen, Germany.
(4)Department of Radiotherapy and Oncology, Goethe-University Frankfurt, Germany.
(5)German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany and German Cancer
Consortium (DKTK) partner sites: Frankfurt, Germany; Department of Radiotherapy
and Oncology, Goethe-University Frankfurt, Germany.
(6)German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany and German Cancer
Consortium (DKTK) partner sites: Freiburg, Germany; Department of Radiation
Oncology, Clinical Study Section, University of Freiburg, Germany.
(7)German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany and German Cancer
Consortium (DKTK) partner sites: Freiburg, Germany; Department of Radiation
Oncology, University of Freiburg, Germany.
(8)German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany and German Cancer
Consortium (DKTK) partner sites: Heidelberg, Germany; Department of Radiation
Oncology, Heidelberg Ion Therapy Center (HIT), Heidelberg Institute of Radiation 
Oncology (HIRO), National Center for Radiation Research in Oncology (NCRO),
University of Heidelberg Medical School and German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ),
Germany; National Center for Tumor Diseases (NCT), University of Heidelberg
Medical School and German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Germany; Translational
Radiation Oncology, University of Heidelberg Medical School and German Cancer
Research Center (DKFZ), Germany.
(9)German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany and German Cancer
Consortium (DKTK) partner sites: Heidelberg, Germany; Department of Radiation
Oncology, Heidelberg Ion Therapy Center (HIT), Heidelberg Institute of Radiation 
Oncology (HIRO), National Center for Radiation Research in Oncology (NCRO),
University of Heidelberg Medical School and German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ),
Germany; National Center for Tumor Diseases (NCT), University of Heidelberg
Medical School and German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Germany; Clinical
Cooperation Unit Radiation Oncology, University of Heidelberg Medical School and 
German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Germany.
(10)German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany and German Cancer
Consortium (DKTK) partner sites: Munich, Germany.
(11)German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany and German Cancer
Consortium (DKTK) partner sites: Munich, Germany; Department of Radiotherapy and 
Radiation Oncology, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität, Munich, Germany.
(12)German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany and German Cancer
Consortium (DKTK) partner sites: Munich, Germany; Department of Radiation
Oncology, Technische Universität München, Germany.
(13)German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany and German Cancer
Consortium (DKTK) partner sites: Tübingen, Germany; Department of Radiation
Oncology, Faculty of Medicine and University Hospital Tübingen, Eberhard Karls
Universität Tübingen, Germany.
(14)German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany and German Cancer
Consortium (DKTK) partner sites: Dresden, Germany; OncoRay - National Center for 
Radiation Research in Oncology, Faculty of Medicine and University Hospital Carl 
Gustav Carus, Technische Universität Dresden, Germany.
(15)German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany and German Cancer
Consortium (DKTK) partner sites: Dresden, Germany; Institute of Pathology,
Faculty of Medicine and University Hospital Carl Gustav Carus, Technische
Universität Dresden, Germany; Tumor- and Normal Tissue Bank, Universitäts
KrebsCentrum (UCC), University Hospital Carl Gustav Carus, Technische Universität
Dresden, Germany.
(16)OncoRay - National Center for Radiation Research in Oncology, Faculty of
Medicine and University Hospital Carl Gustav Carus, Technische Universität
Dresden, Germany.
(17)Department of Biostatistics, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston, USA.
(18)German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany and German Cancer
Consortium (DKTK) partner sites: Dresden, Germany; Department of Radiation
Oncology, Faculty of Medicine and University Hospital Carl Gustav Carus,
Technische Universität Dresden, Germany; OncoRay - National Center for Radiation 
Research in Oncology, Faculty of Medicine and University Hospital Carl Gustav
Carus, Technische Universität Dresden, Germany; Institute of Radiooncology,
Helmholtz-Zentrum Dresden - Rossendorf, Germany.
(19)German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany and German Cancer
Consortium (DKTK) partner sites: Dresden, Germany; Department of Radiation
Oncology, Faculty of Medicine and University Hospital Carl Gustav Carus,
Technische Universität Dresden, Germany; OncoRay - National Center for Radiation 
Research in Oncology, Faculty of Medicine and University Hospital Carl Gustav
Carus, Technische Universität Dresden, Germany; Institute of Radiooncology,
Helmholtz-Zentrum Dresden - Rossendorf, Germany. Electronic address:
Michael.Baumann@uniklinikum-dresden.de.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the impact of HPV status in patients with locally
advanced head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC), who received surgery and 
cisplatin-based postoperative radiochemotherapy.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: For 221 patients with locally advanced squamous cell
carcinoma of the hypopharynx, oropharynx or oral cavity treated at the 8 partner 
sites of the German Cancer Consortium, the impact of HPV DNA, p16 overexpression 
and p53 expression on outcome were retrospectively analysed. The primary endpoint
was loco-regional tumour control; secondary endpoints were distant metastases and
overall survival.
RESULTS: In the total patient population, univariate analyses revealed a
significant impact of HPV16 DNA positivity, p16 overexpression, p53 positivity
and tumour site on loco-regional tumour control. Multivariate analysis stratified
for tumour site showed that positive HPV 16 DNA status correlated with
loco-regional tumour control in patients with oropharyngeal carcinoma (p=0.02)
but not in the oral cavity carcinoma group. Multivariate evaluation of the
secondary endpoints in the total population revealed a significant association of
HPV16 DNA positivity with overall survival (p<0.01) but not with distant
metastases.
CONCLUSIONS: HPV16 DNA status appears to be a strong prognosticator of
loco-regional tumour control after postoperative cisplatin-based
radiochemotherapy of locally advanced oropharyngeal carcinoma and is now being
explored in a prospective validation trial.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.radonc.2014.11.011 
PMID: 25480095  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
