
Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.


2622. J Med Virol. 2016 Feb;88(2):336-44. doi: 10.1002/jmv.24327. Epub 2015 Jul 21.

Higher levels of oxidative DNA damage in cervical cells are correlated with the
grade of dysplasia and HPV infection.

Visalli G(1), Riso R(1), Facciolà A(1), Mondello P(2), Caruso C(3), Picerno I(1),
Di Pietro A(1), Spataro P(1), Bertuccio MP(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences and Morphological and Functional Images,
University of Messina, Messina, Italy.
(2)Riuniti Papardo Piemonte Hospital, Messina, Italy.
(3)Department of Paediatric, Gynaecological, Microbiological and Biomedical
Sciences, University of Messina, Messina, Italy.

The Human papillomavirus is responsible for the most common sexually transmitted 
infection and is also known to be an oncogenic virus that is associated with
cervical, anogenital, and head-neck cancers. The present study aims to assess
whether oxidative DNA damage is correlated with the grade of HPV-related lesions.
Moreover, we evaluated clinical data and unhealthy lifestyles to verify their
possible influence on the genesis of oxidative DNA damage in cervical cells. We
quantified the amount of 8-Oxo-2'-deoxyguanosine in DNA as a biomarker of
oxidative damage in women with and without HPV infection. We also correlated
oxidative damage with different stages of cervical lesions and available clinical
data (e.g., HPV genotypes). To identify HPV infections, in which proteins with a 
transforming potential are produced, we performed a qualitative detection of HPV 
E6/E7 mRNA. Our results showed greater oxidative damage in HPV-related dysplastic
cervical lesions compared to samples with normal cytology, especially in women
with high-grade squamous intraepithelial lesions. The latter showed a closed link
with high-risk HPV genotypes. Reactive oxygen species can induce DNA
double-strand breaks in both the host DNA and in the circular viral episome; this
could facilitate the integration of the virus, promoting HPV carcinogenesis.
Therefore, in HPV-infected women, it could be useful to reduce additional
resources of reactive oxygen/nitrogen species (RONS) with a healthy lifestyle.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/jmv.24327 
PMID: 26174792  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
