

2634. Anticancer Res. 2016 Aug;36(8):3917-24.

Expression of Cell Cycle-Related Proteins p16, p27, p53 and Ki-67 in HPV-positive
and -negative Samples of Papillomas of the Upper Respiratory Tract.

Zatonski T(1), Ciesielska U(2), Nowinska K(3), Ratajczak-Wielgomas K(3),
Kobierzycki C(3), Pula B(3), Podhorska-Okolow M(3), Krecicki T(1), Dziegiel P(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, Wroclaw Medical
University, Wroclaw, Poland.
(2)Department of Histology and Embryology, Wroclaw Medical University, Wroclaw,
Poland urszula.ciesielska@umed.wroc.pl.
(3)Department of Histology and Embryology, Wroclaw Medical University, Wroclaw,
Poland.
(4)Department of Histology and Embryology, Wroclaw Medical University, Wroclaw,
Poland Department of Physiotherapy, University School of Physical Education,
Wroclaw, Poland.

BACKGROUND: The role of human papillomavirus (HPV) infection as an etiological
factor of respiratory tract papillomas has been described in numerous studies,
however its role in malignant transformation has not been clearly defined.
Depending on their oncogenic potential they have been classified as low- and
high-risk HPVs. We analyzed the expression of four cell cycle-related proteins in
order to understand the processes leading to malignant transformation.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Fifty-six cases of pharyngeal and laryngeal papillomas
were analyzed. Nested multiplex polymerase chain reactions to detect the presence
of the HPV types, as well as immunohistochemical reactions were performed for the
detection of cell cycle-related proteins p16, p27, p53 and Ki-67.
RESULTS: The presence of HPVs 6/11 and 16 was confirmed in 10/56 cases. The
expression of all analyzed cell cycle-related proteins was increased in
HPV-infected papillomas.
CONCLUSION: HPV infection of the upper respiratory tract may influence the
expression of cell cycle-related proteins, that could indicate its possible role 
in the process of malignant transformation.

Copyright© 2016 International Institute of Anticancer Research (Dr. John G.
Delinassios), All rights reserved.


PMID: 27466494  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
