

2646. Adv Drug Deliv Rev. 2017 Jan 15;109:63-73. doi: 10.1016/j.addr.2016.02.002. Epub 
2016 Feb 12.

Cancer stem cells: Radioresistance, prediction of radiotherapy outcome and
specific targets for combined treatments.

Krause M(1), Dubrovska A(2), Linge A(3), Baumann M(4).

Author information: 
(1)German Cancer Consortium (DKTK) Dresden, Germany; Dept. of Radiation Oncology,
Technische Universität Dresden, Germany; OncoRay, Faculty of Medicine and
University Hospital Carl Gustav Carus, Technische Universität Dresden, Germany;
Helmholtz-Zentrum Dresden-Rossendorf, Germany; German Cancer Research Center
(DKFZ) Heidelberg, Germany. Electronic address:
mechthild.krause@uniklinikum-dresden.de.
(2)German Cancer Consortium (DKTK) Dresden, Germany; OncoRay, Faculty of Medicine
and University Hospital Carl Gustav Carus, Technische Universität Dresden,
Germany; German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ) Heidelberg, Germany.
(3)German Cancer Consortium (DKTK) Dresden, Germany; Dept. of Radiation Oncology,
Technische Universität Dresden, Germany; OncoRay, Faculty of Medicine and
University Hospital Carl Gustav Carus, Technische Universität Dresden, Germany;
German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ) Heidelberg, Germany.
(4)German Cancer Consortium (DKTK) Dresden, Germany; Dept. of Radiation Oncology,
Technische Universität Dresden, Germany; OncoRay, Faculty of Medicine and
University Hospital Carl Gustav Carus, Technische Universität Dresden, Germany;
Helmholtz-Zentrum Dresden-Rossendorf, Germany; German Cancer Research Center
(DKFZ) Heidelberg, Germany.

Inactivation of cancer stem cells (CSCs) is of utmost importance for tumor cure
after radiotherapy. An increasing body of evidence complies with a higher
radioresistance of CSCs compared to the mass of tumor cells, supporting the use
of CSC related biomarkers for prediction of radiotherapy outcome. Treatment
individualization strategies for patient groups with vastly different risk of
recurrence will most likely require application of more than one biomarker.
Specifically, inclusion of established biomarkers like tumor size for primary
radio(chemo)therapy or human papilloma virus (HPV) infection status in head and
neck squamous cell carcinoma seems to be of very high relevance. The high
heterogeneity of CSC subclones along with changes of the functional behavior of
individual tumors under treatment underlines the importance of the selection of
the optimal timepoint(s) of biomarker evaluation, but also provides a potential
therapeutic target for combined treatment approaches with irradiation.

Copyright © 2016 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.addr.2016.02.002 
PMID: 26877102  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
