

2658. Otolaryngol Pol. 2014 Jul-Aug;68(4):157-73. doi: 10.1016/j.otpol.2014.05.004.
Epub 2014 Jun 3.

HPV vaccination in head and neck HPV-related pathologies.

Wierzbicka M(1), Józefiak A(2), Jackowska J(2), Szydłowski J(3),
Goździcka-Józefiak A(4).

Author information: 
(1)Katedra i Klinika Otolaryngologii i Onkologii Laryngologicznej UM w Poznaniu, 
Kierownik: Prof. dr hab. Witold Szyfter, Poland. Electronic address:
gowierzb@yahoo.co.uk.
(2)Katedra i Klinika Otolaryngologii i Onkologii Laryngologicznej UM w Poznaniu, 
Kierownik: Prof. dr hab. Witold Szyfter, Poland.
(3)Klinika Otolaryngologii Dziecięcej UM w Poznaniu, Kierownik: dr hab. Jarosław 
Szydłowski, Poland.
(4)Zakład Wirusologii Molekularnej, Wydział Biologii Uniwersytetu im. Adama
Mickiewicza w Poznaniu, Poland.

Recent data demonstrate that human papilloma virus (HPV) plays a role in
pathologies other than ano-genital cancers, specifically head and neck
malignancies, and non-cancerous conditions such as recurrent respiratory
papillomatosis (RRP). High-risk HPV16 and 18, and low risk HPV6 and 11 play the
main role in HPV-related pathologies. As more and more information about the role
of HPV infection in non-cervical diseases is amassed, additional questions about 
whether prophylactic HPV vaccines will effectively prevent these conditions are
raised. HPV vaccination programs for the cervical pathology are being implemented
worldwide. In the United States, the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA)
approved the quadrivalent HPV vaccine for girls in 2006 and for boys in 2011.
These vaccination programs were aimed at the genital, HPV-related lesions, and
there was not much recognition at that time of how HPV vaccination programs might
affect oral HPV infection, which is a risk factor for the development of
HPV-related head and neck cancers. Vaccination has proved to be a successful
policy, and an extant recommendation is aimed at preventing HPV and associated
cervical and other anogenital cancers with the routine use of HPV vaccines for
males and females. However, HPV vaccines are presently not recommended for
preventing oropharyngeal cancer (OPC), although they have been shown to be highly
effective against the HPV strains that are most commonly found in the oropharynx.
This review is aimed at presenting the evidence-based knowledge concerning HPV
vaccination and highlighting the trials and strategies for vaccine administration
in HPV-dependent head and neck pathologies.

Copyright © 2014 Polish Otorhinolaryngology - Head and Neck Surgery Society.
Published by Elsevier Urban & Partner Sp. z.o.o. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.otpol.2014.05.004 
PMID: 24981297  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
