

2659. Anticancer Res. 2014 Dec;34(12):7061-9.

Incomplete epithelial-mesenchymal transition in p16-positive squamous cell
carcinoma cells correlates with β-catenin expression.

Umbreit C(1), Flanjak J(2), Weiss C(3), Erben P(4), Aderhold C(2), Faber A(2),
Stern-Straeter J(2), Hoermann K(2), Schultz JD(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, University Medical
Centre Mannheim, Medical Faculty Mannheim, University of Heidelberg, Mannheim,
Germany claudia.umbreit@umm.de.
(2)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, University Medical
Centre Mannheim, Medical Faculty Mannheim, University of Heidelberg, Mannheim,
Germany.
(3)Institute of Medical Statistics and Biometry, University Medical Centre
Mannheim, Medical Faculty Mannheim, University of Heidelberg, Mannheim, Germany.
(4)Department of Urology, University Medical Centre Mannheim, Medical Faculty
Mannheim, University of Heidelberg, Mannheim, Germany.

BACKGROUND: The epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is suggested to be a
crucial factor for the development of an invasive and metastatic cell phenotype, 
which is characterized by down-regulation of epithelial adhesive proteins (e.g.
E-cadherin) and induction of mesenchymal proteins (e.g. vimentin). Therefore,
there is a great clinical interest to specify this phenotype. Different growth
factors induce EMT, such as epithelial growth factor (EGF) and transforming
growth factor beta 1 (TGFβ1). The role of EMT in human papilloma virus
(HPV)-positive squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) is still not understood. The aim of 
this study was to investigate the expression pattern in p16-positive and
-negative SCC cells of vimentin, β-catenin and E-cadherin after stimulation with 
growth factors.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We incubated the p16-positive CERV196 and p16-negative
HNSCC22B SCC cell lines with EGF and EGF/TGFβ1 (10 ng/ml) and detected
E-cadherin, vimentin and β-catenin by immunocytochemistry and enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assay after 5, 24 and 96 h.
RESULTS: We found a low expression of vimentin in all studied tumor cell lines.
The negative control of HNSCC22B cells showed a higher intrinsic level of
membranous E-cadherin and β-catenin. We found statistically significant
EGF/TGFβ1-induced expression of vimentin dependent on incubation time in
p16-negative HNSCC22B cells. Particularly in the presence of EGF, we detected an 
increase of β-catenin and vimentin expression in p16-positive SCC tumor cell
lines in addition to induced cell scattering and unexpected expression of
E-cadherin.
CONCLUSION: In conclusion, E-cadherin, β-catenin and vimentin expression are
important features to characterize EMT-like events. We were able to show
incomplete EGF-induced EMT with β-catenin expression in p16-positive SCC.
Extended studies are required to investigate the mechanistic role of EMT markers,
especially in p16-positive SCC, in order to develop new anti-SCC therapies to
block EMT progression.

Copyright© 2014 International Institute of Anticancer Research (Dr. John G.
Delinassios), All rights reserved.


PMID: 25503133  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
