

2663. Cell Transplant. 2014 Apr;23(6):747-60. doi: 10.3727/096368913X669761. Epub 2013 
Jun 27.

Wnt1 from cochlear schwann cells enhances neuronal differentiation of
transplanted neural stem cells in a rat spiral ganglion neuron degeneration
model.

He Y(1), Zhang PZ, Sun D, Mi WJ, Zhang XY, Cui Y, Jiang XW, Mao XB, Qiu JH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Xijing Hospital, Fourth
Military Medical University, Xi'an, China.

Although neural stem cell (NSC) transplantation is widely expected to become a
therapy for nervous system degenerative diseases and injuries, the low neuronal
differentiation rate of NSCs transplanted into the inner ear is a major obstacle 
for the successful treatment of spiral ganglion neuron (SGN) degeneration. In
this study, we validated whether the local microenvironment influences the
neuronal differentiation of transplanted NSCs in the inner ear. Using a rat SGN
degeneration model, we demonstrated that transplanted NSCs were more likely to
differentiate into microtubule-associated protein 2 (MAP2)-positive neurons in
SGN-degenerated cochleae than in control cochleae. Using real-time quantitative
PCR and an immunofluorescence assay, we also proved that the expression of Wnt1
(a ligand of Wnt signaling) increases significantly in Schwann cells in the
SGN-degenerated cochlea. We further verified that NSC cultures express receptors 
and signaling components for Wnts. Based on these expression patterns, we
hypothesized that Schwann cell-derived Wnt1 and Wnt signaling might be involved
in the regulation of the neuronal differentiation of transplanted NSCs. We
verified our hypothesis in vitro using a coculture system. We transduced a
lentiviral vector expressing Wnt1 into cochlear Schwann cell cultures and
cocultured them with NSC cultures. The coculture with Wnt1-expressing Schwann
cells resulted in a significant increase in the percentage of NSCs that
differentiated into MAP2-positive neurons, whereas this differentiation-enhancing
effect was prevented by Dkk1 (an inhibitor of the Wnt signaling pathway). These
results suggested that Wnt1 derived from cochlear Schwann cells enhanced the
neuronal differentiation of transplanted NSCs through Wnt signaling pathway
activation. Alterations of the microenvironment deserve detailed investigation
because they may help us to conceive effective strategies to overcome the barrier
of the low differentiation rate of transplanted NSCs.

DOI: 10.3727/096368913X669761 
PMID: 23809337  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
