

2690. Otol Neurotol. 2010 Jan;31(1):31-41.

A summary of the literature on global hearing impairment: current status and
priorities for action.

Tucci D(1), Merson MH, Wilson BS.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Otolaryngology Head and Neck Surgery, Department of Surgery, Duke 
University Medical Center, Durham, North Carolina 27710, USA.
tucci001@mc.duke.edu

BACKGROUND: Hearing loss (HL) and deafness are global issues that affect at least
278 million people worldwide. Two thirds of the people who have HL worldwide live
in developing countries. Importantly, it is estimated that 50% of this HL can be 
prevented. In developing countries, funding for prevention, early detection, and 
rehabilitative programs is severely limited, and therefore, agencies must compete
against priorities to treat life-threatening, pandemic diseases such as human
immunodeficiency virus, malaria, and tuberculosis. Delays in diagnosis are
common, and social attitudes, local customs, and cultural bias are contributing
factors.
OBJECTIVE: The purpose of this review is to gain an understanding of the
prevalence of HL in the developing world and to focus attention on the growing
need for both prevention and effective treatment programs. A second goal is to
use this information to suggest priorities and approaches to address these
problems worldwide.
DATA SOURCES: The data were compiled from a review of the literature on the
global impacts of hearing impairment and recently published reports on the
prevalence and cause of hearing impairment in developing nations.
CONCLUSION: The high prevalence of HL in the developing world is due to a variety
of factors, including lack of widespread comprehensive immunization programs and 
other medical care, and inadequate funds for intervention once HL is identified. 
International organizations, governments, and nongovernment organizations have
many opportunities to prevent and treat HL through cost-effective means.


PMID: 20050266  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
