

2715. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2011 May 1;80(1):249-57. doi:
10.1016/j.ijrobp.2010.11.059.

High stromal carbonic anhydrase IX expression is associated with decreased
survival in P16-negative head-and-neck tumors.

Brockton N(1), Dort J, Lau H, Hao D, Brar S, Klimowicz A, Petrillo S, Diaz R,
Doll C, Magliocco A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Population Health Research, Alberta Health Services-Cancer Care,
Calgary, Alberta, Canada. nigel.brockton@albertahealthservices.ca

PURPOSE: Head-and-neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) is the fifth most common
malignancy worldwide. Alcohol use and tobacco use are the most established risk
factors; however, human papilloma virus (HPV) infection is a major risk factor
for a subset of HNSCCs. Although HPV-positive tumors typically present at a more 
advanced stage at diagnosis, they are associated with a better prognosis. Tumor
hypoxia confers poor prognosis and treatment failure, but direct tumor oxygen
measurement is challenging. Endogenous markers of hypoxia (EMHs) have been
proposed but have not replicated the prognostic utility of direct oxygen
measurement. The expression of endogenous markers of hypoxia may be influenced by
oxygen-independent factors, such as the HPV status of the tumor.
METHODS AND MATERIALS: Consecutive cases of locally advanced HNSCC, treated with 
a uniform regimen of combined radiotherapy and chemotherapy, were identified.
Tissue microarrays were assembled from triplicate 0.6-mm cores of archived tumor 
tissue. HPV status was inferred from semiquantitative p16 immunostaining and
directly measured by use of HPV-specific chromogenic in situ hybridization and
polymerase chain reaction. Automated quantitative fluorescent
immunohistochemistry was conducted to measure epithelial and stromal expression
of carbonic anhydrase IX (CAIX) and glucose transporter 1 (GLUT1).
RESULTS: High stromal CAIX expression was associated with significantly reduced
overall survival (p = 0.03) in patients with p16-negative tumors.
CONCLUSIONS: This is the first study to use quantitative immunohistochemistry to 
examine endogenous markers of hypoxia stratified by tumor p16/HPV status.
Assessment of CAIX expression in p16-negative HNSCC could identify patients with 
the least favorable prognosis and inform therapeutic strategies.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijrobp.2010.11.059 
PMID: 21300470  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
