

2726. Curr Opin Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2009 Apr;17(2):88-94.

Oropharyngeal cancer: current understanding and management.

Cohan DM(1), Popat S, Kaplan SE, Rigual N, Loree T, Hicks WL Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Roswell Park Cancer Institute, Buffalo, New York 14226, USA.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: The goals of this article are: to briefly review oropharyngeal
anatomy; to provide a review of the epidemiology of oropharyngeal cancer in the
Western Hemisphere; to review the literature on the association of human
papilloma virus with oropharyngeal cancer; to review the recent literature on
evolving diagnostic techniques for oropharyngeal cancer; and to summarize
accepted management strategies for oropharyngeal cancer by subsite.
RECENT FINDINGS: The incidence of oropharyngeal cancer may be increasing among
younger age groups in the Western Hemisphere, and this may be related to an
increased association with human papillomavirus 16. The implications of this
viral association with regard to outcomes and management strategies remain under 
investigation. Screening with toluidine blue, autofluorescence, or both may be
useful adjuncts to physical examination and panendoscopy in assessing potentially
invasive or dysplastic lesions of the oropharynx. These techniques remain under
study. MRI and PET scan are proving to be useful techniques for assessing local
extension, regional metastases, and recurrences of squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) 
of the oropharynx in selected cases. However, serial computed tomography scanning
remains the imaging modality of choice in the United States. Early SCCs of the
oropharynx (T1-2), in general, may be managed effectively with either surgery or 
primary irradiation, though, with either technique, clinicians must have a
management plan for the neck. Advanced SCCs of the oropharynx (T3-4, nodally
aggressive, or both) require multimodal approaches consisting of either surgery
along with adjuvant irradiation or concurrent chemoradiation along with salvage
surgery (as necessary).
SUMMARY: Management of SCC of the oropharynx is in a period of transition because
of evolving changes in our understanding of the oncogenic process; evolving
diagnostic techniques; and evolving combinations of therapies, both surgical and 
nonsurgical. For the time being, we propose using local subsite and disease stage
to guide therapeutic decision-making.


PMID: 19373958  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
