

2733. Klin Onkol. 2014;27(4):239-46.

[Anticipated efficacy of HPV vaccination in prophylaxis against nongenital
cancers].

[Article in Czech]

Sehnal B, Vojáčková N, Driák D, Kmoníčková E, Vaňousová D, Maxová K, Neumannová
H, Sláma J.

BACKGROUND: There is a considerable number of studies on the efficacy HPV (human 
papillomavirus) vaccination against different cancers but relevant information is
scattered in diverse journals. This paper is a review summarizing current
knowledge of the potential of HPV vaccination against all HPV related cancers.
AIM: HPV infection is probably the most frequent sexually transmitted disease. At
least 13 HPV genotypes are classified as carcinogenic or probably carcinogenic in
respect to cervical cancer. Almost 100% of cervical cancers are linked to HPV
infection. HPV 16 and HPV 18 are the most frequently involved genotypes and
account together for approximately 70% of cervical cancer in the world.
Persistent high risk HPV infection is responsible for a significant proportion of
vulvar, vaginal, anal and penile carcinomas. The virus has also been implicated
in oncogenesis of head and neck cancers, including oropharyngeal cancers. HPV
infection can play an important role in cancerogenesis of lung, esophagus,
breast, and colon and rectum. On the contrary, published results indicate that
HPV infection is not associated with prostate oncogenesis. Strong predominance of
HPV 16 has been reported for all HPV associated cancer sites. Generally, it is
estimated that approximately 5.2% of all cancers are associated with oncogenic
HPV infection. Currently, there are two vaccines on the market; quadrivalent
Silgard® (Gardasil®) and bivalent CervarixTM. Large trials for both vaccines have
shown efficacy against HPV related infection and disease. Efficacy has been very 
high in HPV naive subjects to vaccine related types. While HPV vaccination is
currently approved for the prevention of cervical cancer, it also has the
potential in the prevention of all HPV associated malignancies. The Czech
republic belongs to countries that cover HPV vaccination of girls at the age of
13- 14 years by general health insurance. Overall impact of this vaccination
remains to be evaluated. The new issues of the role of HPV in oncogenesis, as
well as the potential effect of HPV vaccination against HPV related nongenital
cancers are discussed.
CONCLUSION: Approximately 5.2% of all human cancers are associated with oncogenic
human papillomavirus infection. HPV vaccination against the most risky HPV
oncotypes may cause a significant reduction of these cancers mainly in the HPV
naive population.


PMID: 25115712  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
