

2735. Acta Otorrinolaringol Esp. 2017 May - Jun;68(3):169-180. doi:
10.1016/j.otorri.2016.04.003. Epub 2016 Oct 25.

Otorhinolaryngology manifestations secondary to oral sex.

[Article in English, Spanish]

Fernández-López C(1), Morales-Angulo C(2).

Author information: 
(1)Servicio de Otorrinolaringología, Facultad de Medicina, Universidad de
Cantabria, HUMV Santander, IDIVAL, Cantabria, Santander, España.
(2)Servicio de Otorrinolaringología, Facultad de Medicina, Universidad de
Cantabria, HUMV Santander, IDIVAL, Cantabria, Santander, España. Electronic
address: cmorales@humv.es.

INTRODUCTION: Over the last few years, oral and pharyngeal signs and symptoms due
to oral sex have increased significantly. However, no review articles related to 
this subject have been found in the medical literature. The objective of our
study was to identify otorhinolaryngological manifestations associated with
orogenital/oroanal contact, both in adults and children, in the context of
consensual sex or sexual abuse.
METHODS: We performed a review of the medical literature on
otorhinolaryngological pathology associated with oral sex published in the last
20 years in the PubMed database.
RESULTS: Otorhinolaryngological manifestations secondary to oral sex practice in 
adults can be infectious, tumoral or secondary to trauma. The more common signs
and symptoms found in the literature were human papillomavirus infection (above
all, condyloma acuminata and papilloma/condyloma), oral or pharyngeal syphilis,
gonococcal pharyngitis, herpes simplex virus infection and pharyngitis from
Chlamydia trachomatis. The incidence of human papillomavirus -induced
oropharyngeal carcinoma has dramatically increased. In children past the neonatal
period, the presence of condyloma acuminatus, syphilis, gonorrhoea or palatal
ecchymosis (the last one, unless justified by other causes) should make us
suspect sexual abuse.
CONCLUSIONS: Sexual habits have changed in the last decades, resulting in the
appearance of otorhinolaryngological pathology that was rarely seen previously.
For this reason, it is important for primary care physicians to have knowledge
about the subject to perform correct diagnosis and posterior treatment. Some
sexual abuse cases in children may also be suspected based on the knowledge of
the characteristic oropharyngeal manifestations secondary to them.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier España, S.L.U. and Sociedad Española de
Otorrinolaringología y Cirugía de Cabeza y Cuello. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.otorri.2016.04.003 
PMID: 27793330  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
