

2755. Dan Med J. 2012 Oct;59(10):B4524.

On the biology of the bony otic capsule and the pathogenesis of otosclerosis.

Bloch SL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology Head and Neck Surgery, Rigshospitalet,
Blegdamsvej 9, 2100 Copenhagen, Denmark. sunebloch@hotmail.com

In human otosclerosis, focal pathological bone remodeling occurs in significant
amounts inside the normally anti-resorptive perilabyrinthine domain of the bony
otic capsule. Otosclerosis causes hearing loss in 0.2-0.5% of the population by
ankylosis of the footplate. The disease cannot be predicted, avoided or medically
reversed as the pathogenesis remains unknown. Previously genetic research has
failed to identify a specific otosclerosis-gene and earlier theories of virus
infections, autoimmunity or association to generalized bone diseases have been
unable to explain why otosclerosis only occurs in the bony otic capsule while the
rest of the skeleton remains completely normal. Studies from the otopathological 
laboratory (RH) have revealed how the bone turnover rates increase centrifugally 
from a sub-normal 0.1% adjacent to the inner ear space towards a normal 10% per
year at the capsular periphery. This graded restriction of bone remodeling is
most likely caused by the anti-resorptive action of the cytokine osteoprotegerin 
(OPG), which is expressed in high levels (1000 x normal bone levels) by inner ear
structures to inhibit perilabyrinthine osteoclast formation and function. OPG
knockout mice develop excessive, irregular bone remodeling, stapes fixation and
progressive hearing loss. The lacuno-canalicular porosity is the candidate
anatomical routes for the transmission of OPG-derived signals to the surrounding 
bone. This extracellular signaling pathway depends crucially on the viability of 
individual osteocytes. When bone remodeling is low, the average age of the bone
matrix and osteocytes increases. We detected a high fetal density of labyrinthine
osteocytes, which may secure a life-long anatomical route for inner ear OPG
despite accumulation of non-viable osteocytes. Moreover, 3-D reconstructions and 
vector-based stereology revealed a co-existence between non-viable osteocytes and
otosclerosis. We suggest that bone remodeling may commence when the effect of
anti-resorptive OPG fails locally within regions of non-viable osteocytes. A
sustained OPG signal from surrounding osteocyte survivors might distort the
process and account for the otosclerotic morphology.


PMID: 23158898  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
