

2762. Int J Mol Sci. 2015 Dec 18;16(12):30204-22. doi: 10.3390/ijms161226230.

MicroRNA-Target Network Inference and Local Network Enrichment Analysis Identify 
Two microRNA Clusters with Distinct Functions in Head and Neck Squamous Cell
Carcinoma.

Sass S(1), Pitea A(2)(3), Unger K(4)(5), Hess J(6)(7), Mueller NS(8), Theis
FJ(9)(10).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Computational Biology, Helmholtz Zentrum München, Ingolstädter
Landstr. 1, 85764 Neuherberg, Germany. steffen.sass@helmholtz-muenchen.de.
(2)Institute of Computational Biology, Helmholtz Zentrum München, Ingolstädter
Landstr. 1, 85764 Neuherberg, Germany. adriana.pitea@helmholtz-muenchen.de.
(3)Research Unit Radiation Cytogenetics, Helmholtz Zentrum München, Ingolstädter 
Landstr. 1, 85764 Neuherberg, Germany. adriana.pitea@helmholtz-muenchen.de.
(4)Research Unit Radiation Cytogenetics, Helmholtz Zentrum München, Ingolstädter 
Landstr. 1, 85764 Neuherberg, Germany. unger@helmholtz-muenchen.de.
(5)Clinical Cooperation Group "Personalized Radiotherapy in Head and Neck
Cancer", Helmholtz Zentrum München, Ingolstädter Landstr. 1, 85764 Neuherberg,
Germany. unger@helmholtz-muenchen.de.
(6)Research Unit Radiation Cytogenetics, Helmholtz Zentrum München, Ingolstädter 
Landstr. 1, 85764 Neuherberg, Germany. julia.hess@helmholtz-muenchen.de.
(7)Clinical Cooperation Group "Personalized Radiotherapy in Head and Neck
Cancer", Helmholtz Zentrum München, Ingolstädter Landstr. 1, 85764 Neuherberg,
Germany. julia.hess@helmholtz-muenchen.de.
(8)Institute of Computational Biology, Helmholtz Zentrum München, Ingolstädter
Landstr. 1, 85764 Neuherberg, Germany. nikola.mueller@helmholtz-muenchen.de.
(9)Institute of Computational Biology, Helmholtz Zentrum München, Ingolstädter
Landstr. 1, 85764 Neuherberg, Germany. fabian.theis@helmholtz-muenchen.de.
(10)Department of Mathematics, Technical University of Munich, Boltzmannstr. 3,
85748 Garching, Germany. fabian.theis@helmholtz-muenchen.de.

MicroRNAs represent ~22 nt long endogenous small RNA molecules that have been
experimentally shown to regulate gene expression post-transcriptionally. One main
interest in miRNA research is the investigation of their functional roles, which 
can typically be accomplished by identification of mi-/mRNA interactions and
functional annotation of target gene sets. We here present a novel method
"miRlastic", which infers miRNA-target interactions using transcriptomic data as 
well as prior knowledge and performs functional annotation of target genes by
exploiting the local structure of the inferred network. For the network
inference, we applied linear regression modeling with elastic net regularization 
on matched microRNA and messenger RNA expression profiling data to perform
feature selection on prior knowledge from sequence-based target prediction
resources. The novelty of miRlastic inference originates in predicting
data-driven intra-transcriptome regulatory relationships through feature
selection. With synthetic data, we showed that miRlastic outperformed commonly
used methods and was suitable even for low sample sizes. To gain insight into the
functional role of miRNAs and to determine joint functional properties of miRNA
clusters, we introduced a local enrichment analysis procedure. The principle of
this procedure lies in identifying regions of high functional similarity by
evaluating the shortest paths between genes in the network. We can finally assign
functional roles to the miRNAs by taking their regulatory relationships into
account. We thoroughly evaluated miRlastic on a cohort of head and neck cancer
(HNSCC) patients provided by The Cancer Genome Atlas. We inferred an mi-/mRNA
regulatory network for human papilloma virus (HPV)-associated miRNAs in HNSCC.
The resulting network best enriched for experimentally validated miRNA-target
interaction, when compared to common methods. Finally, the local enrichment step 
identified two functional clusters of miRNAs that were predicted to mediate
HPV-associated dysregulation in HNSCC. Our novel approach was able to
characterize distinct pathway regulations from matched miRNA and mRNA data. An R 
package of miRlastic was made available through:
http://icb.helmholtz-muenchen.de/mirlastic.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms161226230 
PMCID: PMC4691172
PMID: 26694379  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
