
Conflict of interest statement: The authors of this article and the planning
committee members and staff have no relevant financial relationships with
commercial interests to disclose.


2769. Retin Cases Brief Rep. 2015 Winter;9(1):72-7. doi: 10.1097/ICB.0000000000000087.

Retinopathy in a patient with acute Epstein-Barr virus infection: follow-up
analysis using spectral domain optical coherence tomography.

Weller JM(1), Bergua A, Mardin CY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Friedrich-Alexander University
Erlangen-Nuremberg, Erlangen, Germany.

PURPOSE: To describe the clinical findings, diagnostics, and differential
diagnosis in a patient with retinopathy in acute systemic Epstein-Barr virus
(EBV) infection.
METHODS: Description of the clinical course of the EBV retinopathy was based on
the medical record, photographs, and visual fields of the patient. Retinal
morphology was visualized using spectral domain optical coherence tomography
(Heidelberg Engineering), and fluorescein angiography. Multiple serologic tests
were performed to exclude different infectious agents. A 30-year-old male patient
presented with a focal scotoma in his right visual field. One week ago, he
suffered from high fever, joint pain, neck stiffness, and hepatitis; 2 weeks
later, he had returned from a trip to Malaysia.
RESULTS: Visual acuity was 20/20 in both eyes. Fundoscopy showed a paravascular
sharp-edged white lesion with a corresponding crescent-shaped retinal nerve fiber
defect. Serology revealed high titers for EBV immunoglobulin M (IgM), but no EBV 
immunoglobulin G (IgG), indicating an acute infectious mononucleosis. Other
reasons for noninfectious or infectious retinochoroiditis including tropical
microorganisms could be excluded serologically and by imaging. Treatment with
systemic acyclovir and prednisolone acetate eye drops was initiated leading to
recovery of systemic and ocular findings.
CONCLUSION: Acute systemic EBV infection can affect the retina leading to focal
thickening of the inner retinal layers because of focal microinfarction
(cotton-wool spot) or focal infectious infiltration. Spectral domain optical
coherence tomography is capable of detecting changes in retinal morphology in
such cases.

DOI: 10.1097/ICB.0000000000000087 
PMID: 25383851  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
