
Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.


2774. Jpn J Clin Oncol. 2016 Jul;46(7):622-30. doi: 10.1093/jjco/hyw046. Epub 2016 May 
9.

Distribution and clinical significance of circulating tumor cells in
nasopharyngeal carcinoma.

Si Y(1), Lan G(2), Deng Z(2), Wang Y(2), Lu Y(3), Qin Y(2), Huang B(2), Yang
Y(2), Weng J(2), Han X(2), Zhang B(2), Qin Y(2), Xiong W(2), Li B(2), Wu S(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Oncology, The People's Hospital of 
Guangxi Zhuang Autonomous Region, Guangxi Nasopharygeal Carcinoma Institute, The 
People's Hospital of Guangxi Zhuang Autonomous Region, Guangxi uwjp2@sina.com.
(2)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Oncology, The People's Hospital of 
Guangxi Zhuang Autonomous Region, Guangxi Nasopharygeal Carcinoma Institute, The 
People's Hospital of Guangxi Zhuang Autonomous Region, Guangxi.
(3)SurExam Bio-Tech, Guangzhou Technology Innovation Base, Guangzhou, P.R. China.

OBJECTIVE: Nasopharyngeal carcinoma is one of the leading malignancies with
obscure etiology. Circulating tumor cells have been showed to intimately
correlate with characteristics in different kinds of cancer. But links between
circulating tumor cells and nasopharyngeal carcinoma were still lacking.
Therefore, we explored circulating tumor cells' distribution in nasopharyngeal
carcinoma and their possible associations with nasopharyngeal carcinoma.
METHODS: Firstly, we found that the positive ratio of circulating tumor cells is 
extremely high in four stages of nasopharyngeal carcinoma. Meanwhile, positive
ratios of mesenchymal circulating tumor cells were higher in early stages
of nasopharyngeal carcinoma. Apart from epithelial circulating tumor cells,
total, hybrid and mesenchymal circulating tumor cells were correlated
with nasopharyngeal carcinoma clinical stage.
RESULTS: Our results showed that hybrid and mesenchymal circulating tumor cells
were associated with nasopharyngeal carcinoma metastasis (both distant and lymph 
node) and smoking. Meanwhile, hybrid circulating tumor cells expressed the
highest Epstein-Barr virus proteins and deoxyribonucleic acid in three types
of circulating tumor cells. Moreover, we found that Epstein-Barr virus proteins
viral-caspid antigen-immunoglobulin A (VCA/IgA) and early antigen-immunoglobulin 
A (EA/IgA), but not Epstein-Barr virus-deoxyribonucleic acid, had a closed
association with nasopharyngeal carcinoma metastasis. However, Epstein-Barr virus
hallmarks failed to associate with other nasopharyngeal carcinoma
characteristics. Furthermore, we confirmed that matrix metalloproteinase
9 existed in circulating tumor cells and expressed most in
mesenchymal circulating tumor cells. In addition, matrix metalloproteinase
9-expressed extent in hybrid circulating tumor cells is somewhat different from
epithelial and mesenchymal circulating tumor cells in matrix metalloproteinase
9-positive circulating tumor cells. Nevertheless, matrix metalloproteinase 9 had 
no relationship with other nasopharyngeal carcinoma characteristics. Finally, our
results showed that circulating tumor cells were decreased in patients after
therapies.
CONCLUSION: Taken together, circulating tumor cells were tightly correlated
with nasopharyngeal carcinoma characteristics. In addition, Epstein-Barr virus
was associated with nasopharyngeal carcinoma metastasis. Of note,
decreased circulating tumor cells indicated a favorable curative effect in
nasopharyngeal carcinoma patients.

© The Author 2016. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For
Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/jjco/hyw046 
PMID: 27162320  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
