

2776. Rev Med Chir Soc Med Nat Iasi. 2015 Jan-Mar;119(1):119-26.

Retromolar trigone--oropharynx junction maligns tumor surgery: transmandibular
versus oral approach.

Cobzeanu BM, Popescu E, Costan VV, Ungureanu D, Cobzeanu MD.

AIM: This study proposes a new approach to a borderline pathology between
Otorhinolaryngology (E.N.T.) and Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery (O.M.F.), the
malignant tumors of the oropharyngeal and retromolar trigone junction.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: 52 cases of retromolar trigone and oropharynx malign tumors
were solved in the ENT department of "St. Spiridon" Universitary Hospital Iasi
between 2012 and 2014. All patients were males, 35-64 years old, in different TNM
stages. The novelty stands in the multidisciplinary approach, with an operating
team consisting of both E.N.T. and O.M.F. surgeons, which joined their knowledge 
and expertise in order to offer a better treatment for the patient. Human
Papilloma Virus (HPV) infection has been known as a trigger factor in head and
neck cancers. The connection between HPV infection and malignant tumors of the
oropharyngeal--retromolar trigone junction, together with the other traditional
risk factors (smoking, alcohol, stress and sexual behavior) are involved in the
therapeutic protocols, improving the life quality, the survival rate and reducing
the treatment costs.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION: Excision of the malignant tumors at the level of the
junction between the oropharynx and retromolar trigone often requires repairing
the tissular defects that remain using different flaps. Postsurgical
mecanotherapy (physiotherapy) under the surveillance of an experienced
physiotherapist is also needed for a complete recovery.
CONCLUSIONS: This therapeutical protocol aims to assure a better life quality for
the patients, with a faster postsurgical recovery and social reinsertion by
reducing the healing time of the areas affected by inflammation and necrosis
generated by the neoplastic process.


PMID: 25970954  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
