

2787. Curr Opin Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2011 Apr;19(2):132-7. doi:
10.1097/MOO.0b013e328344b668.

Targeted therapy in head and neck cancer.

Licitra L(1), Bergamini C, Mirabile A, Granata R.

Author information: 
(1)Head and Neck Cancer Medical Oncology Unit, Fondazione IRCCS 'Istituto
Nazionale dei Tumori' in Milan, Italy. lisa.licitra@istitutotumori.mi.it

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Results of clinical studies on targeted cancer therapies are
rapidly accumulating. This is also true in the field of head and neck cancer
(HNC). Due to the unique multidisciplinary needs of the disease, it is of
paramount importance that physicians who treat HNC are aware of the evolving
changes that research is offering.
RECENT FINDINGS: Many targeted agents directed at inhibiting epithelial growth
factor receptors (EGFRs) are under investigation in both curable loco-regional
advanced disease in combination with standard treatments and in the recurrent
metastatic setting. Human papilloma virus (HPV)-positive tumors present a
distinct biological profile. Consequently, the role of targeted agents in this
specific setting still needs to be refined. Herein we will briefly review the
results of the most recent studies on targeted agents. Cetuximab and other
monoclonal antibodies (panitumumab, zalotumumab and nimotumumab) have been
already investigated in phase III studies; and some results are now available.
Small molecules inhibiting EGFR have still to prove their efficacy. Other agents 
such as vascular endothelial cell growth factor receptor, vascular
endoinsulin-like growth factor 1 receptor, MET, PI3KA and mammalian target of
rapamycin inhibitor are in development.
SUMMARY: At present treatment options in HNC are changing and include targeted
agents with demonstrated efficacy. A better selection based on biological factors
of patients who are potentially responsive to such targeted agents is being
actively pursued.

DOI: 10.1097/MOO.0b013e328344b668 
PMID: 21372717  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
