

2789. PLoS One. 2013;8(1):e54742. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0054742. Epub 2013 Jan 24.

Comprehensive analysis of DNA methylation in head and neck squamous cell
carcinoma indicates differences by survival and clinicopathologic
characteristics.

Colacino JA(1), Dolinoy DC, Duffy SA, Sartor MA, Chepeha DB, Bradford CR, McHugh 
JB, Patel DA, Virani S, Walline HM, Bellile E, Terrell JE, Stoerker JA, Taylor
JM, Carey TE, Wolf GT, Rozek LS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Health Sciences, University of Michigan School of 
Public Health, Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA.

Head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) is the eighth most commonly
diagnosed cancer in the United States. The risk of developing HNSCC increases
with exposure to tobacco, alcohol and infection with human papilloma virus (HPV).
HPV-associated HNSCCs have a distinct risk profile and improved prognosis
compared to cancers associated with tobacco and alcohol exposure. Epigenetic
changes are an important mechanism in carcinogenic progression, but how these
changes differ between viral- and chemical-induced cancers remains unknown. CpG
methylation at 1505 CpG sites across 807 genes in 68 well-annotated HNSCC tumor
samples from the University of Michigan Head and Neck SPORE patient population
were quantified using the Illumina Goldengate Methylation Cancer Panel.
Unsupervised hierarchical clustering based on methylation identified 6 distinct
tumor clusters, which significantly differed by age, HPV status, and three year
survival. Weighted linear modeling was used to identify differentially methylated
genes based on epidemiological characteristics. Consistent with previous in vitro
findings by our group, methylation of sites in the CCNA1 promoter was found to be
higher in HPV(+) tumors, which was validated in an additional sample set of 128
tumors. After adjusting for cancer site, stage, age, gender, alcohol consumption,
and smoking status, HPV status was found to be a significant predictor for DNA
methylation at an additional 11 genes, including CASP8 and SYBL1. These findings 
provide insight into the epigenetic regulation of viral vs. chemical
carcinogenesis and could provide novel targets for development of individualized 
therapeutic and prevention regimens based on environmental exposures.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0054742 
PMCID: PMC3554647
PMID: 23358896  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
