

2791. Anticancer Res. 2018 May;38(5):2723-2731.

Tyrosine Kinase Inhibition in HPV-related Squamous Cell Carcinoma Reveals
Beneficial Expression of cKIT and Src.

Kramer B(1), Kneissle M(2), Birk R(3), Rotter N(2), Aderhold C(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology Head and Neck Surgery, University Hospital
Mannheim, Medical Faculty Mannheim, University Heidelberg, Manheim, Germany
benedikt.kramer@umm.de.
(2)Department of Otorhinolaryngology Head and Neck Surgery, University Hospital
Mannheim, Medical Faculty Mannheim, University Heidelberg, Manheim, Germany.
(3)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, University Hospital 
Marburg, University Marburg, Marburg, Germany.

BACKGROUND/AIM: Therapeutic options of locally advanced or metastatic head and
neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) are limited. Src and cKIT are key protein
regulators for local tumor progression. The aim of the study was to investigate
the therapeutic potential of targeted therapies in human squamous cell carcinoma 
(HNSCC) in vitro. Therefore, the influence of the selective tyrosine kinase
inhibitors niotinib, dasatinib, erlotinib, gefitinib and afatinib on Src and cKIT
expression in Human papilloma virus (HPV)-positive and HPV-negative squamous
cancer cells (SCC) was analyzed in vitro.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: ELISA was performed to evaluate the expression of Src and 
cKIT under the influence of nilotinib, dasatinib, erlotinib, gefitinib and
afatinib (10 μmol/l) in HPV-negative and HPV-positive SCC (24-96 h of
incubation).
RESULTS: Gefitinib significantly increased cKIT expression in HPV-positive and
HPV-negative cells whereas nilotinib and afatinib decreased cKIT expression in
HPV-positive SCC. The influence of tyrosine kinase inhibitors in HPV-negative SCC
was marginal. Surprisingly, Src expression was significantly increased by all
tested tyrosine kinase inhibitors in HPV-positive SCC.
CONCLUSION: The results revealed beneficial and unexpected information concerning
the interaction of selective tyrosine kinase inhibitors and the tumor biology of 
HNSCC.

Copyright© 2018, International Institute of Anticancer Research (Dr. George J.
Delinasios), All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.21873/anticanres.12514 
PMID: 29715092  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
