

2819. Med Oral Patol Oral Cir Bucal. 2014 Jul 1;19(4):e377-85.

Histopathologic risk factors in oral and oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma
variants: an update with special reference to HPV-related carcinomas.

El-Mofty SK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Campus Box 8118, Washington University School of Medicine, Department of
Pathology and Immunology, 660 South Euclid Avenue, St Louis, MO. 63110, USA,
elmofty@wustl.edu.

Accurate identification of the microscopic risk factors of oral and oropharyngeal
(OP) squamous cell carcinomas (SCC) and their morphologic variants is of at most 
importance, as these generally determine treatment modalities, prognosis and
overall patient outcome. The great majority of oral and oropharyngeal squamous
cell carcinomas are microscopically described as kerartinizing squamous cell
carcinoma (KSCC). They bear certain resemblance to keratinizing stratified
squamous epithelium. Tobacco habits and excessive consumption of alcoholic
beverages have been considered to be the main etiologic agents in these
carcinomas. The tumors occurred in older patients more commonly affected the oral
tongue and floor of the mouth with well established morphologic risk factors
including tumor grade, pattern of invasion and perineural involvement. Within the
last 30 years however, the advent and expanding prevalence of high risk human
papillomavirus (HPV) as an important etiologic agent for head and neck squamous
cell carcinoma, particularly in the OP, has resulted in a significant change in
the established morphologic criteria for risk assessment. The majority of HPV
relate carcinomas of the OP are nonkeratinizing squamous cell carcinoma (NKSCC). 
These tumors are found to be more responsive to treatment with a favorable
patient outcome and good prognosis. Consequently, alterations in treatment
protocols aimed at de-escalation are currently being evaluated. More recently,
other morphologic variants that are HPV positive are reported with increasing
frequency in the OP and other head and neck sites. As a result, several clinical 
and pathologic questions have emerged. Importantly, whether the virus is
biologically active in these tumors and involved in their pathogenesis, and
second, what are the clinical implications with regard to patient management and 
outcome in the HPV-related variants. Examples of HPV-related squamous cell
carcinoma variants that will be addressed here are: basaloid squamous cell
carcinoma (BSCC), undifferentiated carcinoma (UCa), papillary squamous carcinoma 
(PSCC) and small cell carcinoma. Some studies have suggested favorable prognosis 
in some variants, analogous to that of the (NKSCC), while others showed poorer
outcome. So far the number of studies on this subject is limited and the number
of cases evaluated in each investigation is few. Because of that, it is prudent
at this stage, not to alter management protocols as a result of identification of
HPV in these variants and to await additional information.


PMCID: PMC4119314
PMID: 24880454  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
