

2822. Expert Rev Vaccines. 2009 Sep;8(9):1221-35. doi: 10.1586/erv.09.76.

Therapeutic HPV DNA vaccines.

Monie A(1), Tsen SW, Hung CF, Wu TC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions, Baltimore, MD,
USA. amonie1@jhmi.edu

Human papillomavirus (HPV) has been associated with several human cancers,
including cervical cancer, vulvar cancer, vaginal and anal cancer, and a subset
of head and neck cancers. The identification of HPV as an etiological factor for 
HPV-associated malignancies creates the opportunity for the control of these
cancers through vaccination. Currently, the preventive HPV vaccine using HPV
virus-like particles has been proven to be safe and highly effective. However,
this preventive vaccine does not have therapeutic effects, and a significant
number of people have established HPV infection and HPV-associated lesions.
Therefore, it is necessary to develop therapeutic HPV vaccines to facilitate the 
control of HPV-associated malignancies and their precursor lesions. Among the
various forms of therapeutic HPV vaccines, DNA vaccines have emerged as a
potentially promising approach for vaccine development due to their safety
profile, ease of preparation and stability. However, since DNA does not have the 
intrinsic ability to amplify or spread in transfected cells like viral vectors,
DNA vaccines can have limited immunogenicity. Therefore, it is important to
develop innovative strategies to improve DNA vaccine potency. Since dendritic
cells (DCs) are key players in the generation of antigen-specific immune
responses, it is important to develop innovative strategies to modify the
properties of the DNA-transfected DCs. These strategies include increasing the
number of antigen-expressing/antigen-loaded DCs, improving antigen processing and
presentation in DCs, and enhancing the interaction between DCs and T cells. Many 
of the studies on DNA vaccines have been performed on preclinical models.
Encouraging results from impressive preclinical studies have led to several
clinical trials.

DOI: 10.1586/erv.09.76 
PMCID: PMC2752853
PMID: 19722895  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
