

2831. Am J Health Syst Pharm. 2009 May 15;66(10):908-15. doi: 10.2146/ajhp070605.

Propofol infusion syndrome: case report and literature review.

Orsini J(1), Nadkarni A, Chen J, Cohen N.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Critical Care Medicine, Albert Einstein College of Medicine and
Montefiore Medical Center, Bronx, NY 10467-2490, USA. joseorsini@yahoo.com

PURPOSE: A case of propofol infusion syndrome in a patient with respiratory
failure and sepsis is reported.
SUMMARY: A 36-year-old Hispanic woman was admitted to the medical intensive care 
unit for treatment of respiratory failure and sepsis, likely secondary to
pneumonia. Her medical history included human immunodeficiency virus infection
and chronic hepatitis C virus infection. She was intubated and placed on
mechanical ventilation. Empirical i.v. antimicrobial therapy was initiated with
vancomycin, moxifloxacin, piperacillin-tazobactam, trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole,
and micafungin, along with corticosteroids and vasopressors. Propofol 1.5 mg/kg
per hour i.v. and midazolam i.v. were initiated for sedation, but the dosages of 
both propofol and midazolam needed to be increased due to persistent agitation.
On hospital day 7, the patient developed a morbilliform rash on her neck,
shoulders, and chest and multiple abnormal laboratory test values, including
elevated levels of alanine transaminase, aspartate transaminase, amylase, lipase,
creatine kinase, and triglycerides. Serial electrocardiograms revealed sinus
tachycardia. Computed tomography of the abdomen showed hepatomegaly with fatty
infiltration of the liver, no gallstones, and a normal pancreas. I.V.
phenobarbital was added for sedation, and propofol was tapered and discontinued
on the same day. The patient responded adequately to phenobarbital maintenance
therapy and was eventually weaned off all other sedatives. The patient's
laboratory test values returned to normal within 72 hours after discontinuation
of the propofol infusion, and the rash and tachycardia resolved.
CONCLUSION: Propofol infusion syndrome developed in a patient with respiratory
failure and sepsis after a prolonged infusion of high-dose propofol.

DOI: 10.2146/ajhp070605 
PMID: 19420309  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
