

2838. Breast Cancer Res. 2011 Aug 10;13(4):R76. doi: 10.1186/bcr2924.

Septin 9 isoform expression, localization and epigenetic changes during human and
mouse breast cancer progression.

Connolly D(1), Yang Z, Castaldi M, Simmons N, Oktay MH, Coniglio S, Fazzari MJ,
Verdier-Pinard P, Montagna C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Yeshiva
University, 1301 Morris Park Avenue, Bronx, NY 10461, USA.

Comment in
    Breast Cancer Res. 2012;14(1):101.

INTRODUCTION: Altered expression of Septin 9 (SEPT9), a septin coding for
multiple isoform variants, has been observed in several carcinomas, including
colorectal, head and neck, ovarian and breast, compared to normal tissues. The
mechanisms regulating its expression during tumor initiation and progression in
vivo and the oncogenic function of its different isoforms remain elusive.
METHODS: Using an integrative approach, we investigated SEPT9 at the genetic,
epigenetic, mRNA and protein levels in breast cancer. We analyzed a panel of
breast cancer cell lines, human primary tumors and corresponding tumor-free
areas, normal breast tissues from reduction mammoplasty patients, as well as
primary mammary gland adenocarcinomas derived from the polyoma virus middle T
antigen, or PyMT, mouse model. MCF7 clones expressing individual GFP-tagged SEPT9
isoforms were used to determine their respective intracellular distributions and 
effects on cell migration.
RESULTS: An overall increase in gene amplification and altered expression of
SEPT9 were observed during breast tumorigenesis. We identified an intragenic
alternative promoter at which methylation regulates SEPT9_v3 expression.
Transfection of specific GFP-SEPT9 isoforms in MCF7 cells indicates that these
isoforms exhibit differential localization and affect migration rates.
Additionally, the loss of an uncharacterized SEPT9 nucleolar localization is
observed during tumorigenesis.
CONCLUSIONS: In this study, we found conserved in vivo changes of SEPT9 gene
amplification and overexpression during human and mouse breast tumorigenesis. We 
show that DNA methylation is a prominent mechanism responsible for regulating
differential SEPT9 isoform expression and that breast tumor samples exhibit
distinctive SEPT9 intracellular localization. Together, these findings support
the significance of SEPT9 as a promising tool in breast cancer detection and
further emphasize the importance of analyzing and targeting SEPT9
isoform-specific expression and function.

DOI: 10.1186/bcr2924 
PMCID: PMC3236340
PMID: 21831286  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
