

2858. Int J Cancer. 2018 Aug 1;143(3):610-620. doi: 10.1002/ijc.31336. Epub 2018 Mar 5.

Spatiotemporal homogeneity and distinctness of the T-cell receptor β-chain
repertoires in Epstein-Barr virus-associated primary and metastatic
nasopharyngeal carcinomas.

Chung YL(1), Wu ML(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, Koo Foundation Sun-Yat-Sen Cancer Center,
Taipei, Taiwan.
(2)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Koo Foundation Sun-Yat-Sen
Cancer Center, Taipei, Taiwan.

Nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC) is an Epstein-Barr virus (EBV)-associated
lymphoepithelioma. The aim of this study was to characterize the homogeneity and 
distinctness of the T-cell repertoires within and between primary and metastatic 
NPCs. We used ultra-deep sequencing of the hypervariably rearranged
antigen-binding CDR3 regions of T-cell receptor beta (TCRbeta ) to
comprehensively profile the T-cell repertoires in NPC patients receiving
definitive chemoradiotherapy with long-term follow-up. We observed not only
various spatially heterogeneous patient-specific TCRbeta clone compositions that 
changed with time but also several commonly enriched TCRbeta subclones that were 
constantly shared between primary NPCs in the head and neck regions, locally
recurrent tumors after treatment and later-developed distant metastatic tumors in
the liver, lung and bone. Comparison of the overlap frequency of the T-cell
clonality between TCRbeta repertoires enabled us to calculate the pairwise
genetic distance between primary NPCs of different patients and different sites
of metastatic or recurrent NPCs. The constructed NPC phylogeny clearly
differentiated the low-risk patients without relapse from the high-risk patients 
with distant metastasis after chemoradiotherapy. In contrast to the rather low
frequency of nonsilent somatic mutations in NPC cells, the degrees of similarity 
and divergence of NPC-infiltrating lymphocyte TCRbeta repertoires among different
patients showed prognostication. Moreover, the persistent presence of commonly
NPC-shared in-frame TCRbeta CDR3 gene sequences spatiotemporally identified in
the NPC-infiltrating lymphocytes within varied EBV-positive NPCs and their
metastases suggest the existence of frequently shared epitopes of neoantigens
virally or nonvirally displayed on cancer cells, thereby providing opportunities 
for the development of precisely tumor-targeted immunotherapy for distant
metastasis.

© 2018 UICC.

DOI: 10.1002/ijc.31336 
PMID: 29468660  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
