

2897. Anticancer Res. 2016 Jun;36(6):3195-8.

Immunohistochemical Evaluation of E6/E7 HPV Oncoproteins Staining in Cervical
Cancer.

Stiasny A(1), Kuhn C(1), Mayr D(2), Alexiou C(3), Janko C(3), Wiest I(3), Jeschke
U(4), Kost B(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Ludwig Maximilian University Munich,
Munich, Germany.
(2)Department of Pathology, Ludwig Maximilian University Munich, Munich, Germany.
(3)ENT-Clinic, Section of Experimental Oncology and Nanomedicine (SEON), Else
Kröner Fresenius Stiftung University Hospital, Erlangen, Germany.
(4)Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Ludwig Maximilian University Munich,
Munich, Germany udo.jeschke@med.uni-muenchen.de.

BACKGROUND/AIM: High-risk human papillomavirus (HPV) subtypes (i.e. 16 and 18)
lead to uterine cervical cancer as well as HPV-positive oropharyngeal cancer
(OSCC), a form of head and neck cancer. The induction of HPV-induced cancer is
driven by virus-specific oncoproteins E6 and E7. E6 protein of HPV types 16 and
18 interacts with the E3 ubiquitin protein ligase, resulting in ubiquitination
and proteolysis of tumor protein p53. E7 inactivates retinoblastoma protein (Rb) 
by phosphorylation followed by an increase of free eukaryotic transcription
factor E2F (E2F) in the cell. This leads to an increase of cyclin-dependent
kinase inhibitor p16, that is used as an immunohistochemical marker of
HPV-associated OSCC. Unfortunately, p16 is not exclusively increased by E7
oncoprotein in carcinogenesis. Therefore, the aim of this study was to develop an
immunohistochemical approach for the direct detection of E6/E7 oncoproteins in
uterine cervical cancer as well as in OSCC.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: Paraffin sections of uterine cervical cancer and 130 were
analyzed. Immunohistochemical staining protocols were evaluated with tissue
slides from patients with cervical dysplasia (CIN III) and squamous epithelial
carcinoma tissue with HPV infection. Liver and placental tissues were used as
negative controls. E6-Specific antibody (Biorbyt) was used as primary antibody.
The polymer staining method and diaminobenzidine were applied for further
development. Panels of E7-specific antibodies were tested. Again, the polymer
staining method and diaminobenzidine were applied for further development.
RESULTS: E6-Specific antibody revealed specific and intense staining after
pre-incubation of tissue slides with citrate buffer solution. Only the E7
antibody obtained from Chemicon showed intense and specific staining in patients 
with CIN III and squamous epithelial carcinoma tissue. Pre-incubation with
proteinase K diminished non-specific reaction.
CONCLUSION: Our results revealed a useful staining protocol for the
immunohistochemical evaluation of E6/E7 oncoprotein expression in uterine
cervical cancer, as well as in HPV-positive oropharyngeal cancer. Advantages of
this method compared to mRNA in situ hybridization of E6/E7 are the much lower
costs, as well as the broader applicability in pathological practice.

Copyright© 2016 International Institute of Anticancer Research (Dr. John G.
Delinassios), All rights reserved.


PMID: 27272848  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
