

2898. Ear Nose Throat J. 2016 Jan;95(1):29-39.

Laryngotracheal mucormycosis: Report of a case.

Mattioni J(1), Portnoy JE, Moore JE, Carlson D, Sataloff RT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Drexel University College 
of Medicine, 219 N. Broad St., Philadelphia, PA 19107, USA.

Airway mucormycosis is a deadly opportunistic infection that affects
immunocompromised persons, particularly diabetics and those undergoing
chemotherapy. Although it is typically a pulmonary or sinonasal infection,
mucormycosis can affect the larynx and trachea, with devastating results. We
report the case of a 46-year-old man with human immunodeficiency virus infection,
hepatitis C infection, neurosyphilis, and recently diagnosed Burkitt lymphoma who
presented with dysphonia and stridor after receiving one dose of intrathecal
chemotherapy. Flexible laryngoscopy detected the presence of fibrinous material
that was obstructing nearly the entire glottis. Surgical debridement revealed a
firm mucosal attachment; there was little bleeding when it was removed. After
debridement, the patient's dyspnea improved only to recur 2 days later. After an 
awake tracheotomy, laryngoscopy and bronchoscopy identified necrosis extending
from the supraglottic area to the carina tracheae. Biopsies demonstrated hyphal
architecture consistent with mucormycosis. Despite continued debridements, the
fibrinous material reaccumulated. The patient was placed in hospice care; his
airway remained patent, but he died from other causes several weeks after
presentation. The management of airway mucormycosis is challenging and complex.
Fungal airway infections should be considered in the differential diagnosis of an
immunosuppressed patient who presents with dyspnea, dysphonia, and vocal fold
immobility. Timely diagnosis and management are critical for a successful
outcome, although the prognosis is poor if the infection is widespread, even with
the best of efforts.


PMID: 26829683  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
