

2914. J Infect Dev Ctries. 2014 Jan 15;8(1):17-23. doi: 10.3855/jidc.4206.

Ear, nose and throat (ENT) involvement in zoonotic diseases: a systematic review.

Galletti B(1), Mannella VK, Santoro R, Rodriguez-Morales AJ, Freni F, Galletti C,
Galletti F, Cascio A.

Author information: 
(1)University Hospital G. Martino, Messina, Italy. bgalletti@unime.it.

INTRODUCTION: Zoonoses are infections transmitted from animal to man, either
directly (through direct contact or contact with animal products) or indirectly
(through an intermediate vector, such as an arthropod). The causative agents
include bacteria, parasites, viruses, and fungi. The purpose of this review is to
make an accurate examination of all zoonotic diseases that can be responsible of 
ear, nose, and throat (ENT) involvement.
METHODOLOGY: A PubMed search was performed combining the terms
(otorhinolaryngology OR rhinology OR laryngology OR otology OR mastoiditis OR
otitis OR sinusitis OR laryngitis OR rhinitis OR pharyngitis OR epiglottitis OR
dysphonia OR ear OR larynx OR nose OR pharynx) with each one of the etiological
agents of zoonoses for the period between January 1997 and August 2012 without
language restrictions.
RESULTS: A total of 164 articles were selected and examined. Larynx was the most 
commonly involved ENT organ, followed by oral cavity, pharynx, and neck. Bacteria
were the most representative microorganisms involved. Nose and major salivary
glands were affected most frequently by protozoa; paranasal sinus, oral cavity,
ear, neck, nerves and upper airway by bacteria; and larynx by fungi.
CONCLUSIONS: ENT symptoms and signs may be present in many zoonotic diseases,
some of which are also present in industrialized countries. Most zoonotic
diseases are not commonly encountered by ENT specialists. Appreciation of the
possible occurrence of these diseases is important for a correct microbiological 
approach, which often requires special culture media and diagnostic techniques.

DOI: 10.3855/jidc.4206 
PMID: 24423708  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
