

292. Oral Oncol. 2015 Mar;51(3):229-36. doi: 10.1016/j.oraloncology.2014.11.011. Epub 
2014 Dec 5.

Do high-risk human papillomaviruses cause oral cavity squamous cell carcinoma?

Mirghani H(1), Amen F(2), Moreau F(3), Lacau St Guily J(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Head and Neck Surgery, Institut de Cancérologie Gustave Roussy, 
Villejuif, France. Electronic address: mirghani_fr@yahoo.fr.
(2)Department of Otolaryngology, Peterborough City Hospital and Addenbrooke's
Hospital, Cambridge, UK. Electronic address: furratamen@gmail.com.
(3)Department of Virology, Faculty of Medicine-Pierre et Marie Curie
University-Paris VI and Tenon Hospital, Assistance Publique Hôpitaux de Paris,
France. Electronic address: frederiquemoreau@gmail.com.
(4)Department of Otorhinolaryngology and Head and Neck Surgery, Faculty of
Medicine-Pierre et Marie Curie University-Paris VI and Tenon Hospital, Assistance
Publique Hôpitaux de Paris, France. Electronic address: jean.lacau@tnn.aphp.fr.

High-risk human papillomaviruses (HR-HPV) are an established etiologic factor for
a growing number of oropharyngeal cancers. However, their potential role in other
upper aerodigestive tract locations is still a matter of debate, particularly in 
the oral cavity. This is of paramount importance as in the future diagnosis,
treatment and follow up in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma may vary
according to HPV status. This article reviews the recent published data and
highlights some of the pitfalls that have hampered the accurate assessment of
HR-HPV oncological role outside the oropharynx. We demonstrate that, in contrast 
to the oropharynx, only a small fraction of cancers located in the oral cavity
seem to be HPV-related even in young non-smoking non-drinking patients. We
emphasize several relevant factors to consider in assumed HPV-induced oral cavity
cancers and discuss the current theories that explain why HPV-induced cancers
arise preferentially in the oropharynx.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.oraloncology.2014.11.011 
PMID: 25488179  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
