

2921. Curr Probl Cancer. 2017 Nov - Dec;41(6):398-406. doi:
10.1016/j.currproblcancer.2017.10.001. Epub 2017 Oct 4.

Genomic and epigenetic characterization for the comparison of synchronous
bilateral tongue squamous cell carcinomas-A case report.

Ribeiro IP(1), Barroso L(2), Marques F(3), Santos A(4), Caramelo F(5), Julião
MJ(6), Melo JB(1), Carreira IM(7).

Author information: 
(1)Cytogenetics and Genomics Laboratory, Faculty of Medicine, University of
Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal; CIMAGO-Center of Investigation on Environment
Genetics and Oncobiology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Coimbra, Coimbra,
Portugal.
(2)Maxillofacial Surgery Department, Coimbra Hospital and University Centre,
CHUC, EPE, Coimbra, Portugal.
(3)Department of Dentistry, Faculty of Medicine, University of Coimbra, Coimbra, 
Portugal.
(4)Cytogenetics and Genomics Laboratory, Faculty of Medicine, University of
Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal.
(5)Laboratory of Biostatistics and Medical Informatics, IBILI-Faculty of
Medicine, University of Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal.
(6)Department of Pathology, Coimbra Hospital and University Centre, CHUC, EPE,
Coimbra, Portugal.
(7)Cytogenetics and Genomics Laboratory, Faculty of Medicine, University of
Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal; CIMAGO-Center of Investigation on Environment
Genetics and Oncobiology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Coimbra, Coimbra,
Portugal. Electronic address: citogenetica@fmed.uc.pt.

The tongue is the most common and aggressive site for tumors in the oral cavity. 
These tumors are usually located in the lateral border of the tongue and are
often related to the use of tobacco and alcohol. Clinical management of these
tumors is predominantly based on anatomic location and TNM classification. The
identification of molecular signatures with ability to explain the different
outcomes observed in these patients is of paramount importance to guide and help 
their management.CASE PRESENTATION: we herein describe an 88-year-old woman
diagnosed with synchronous bilateral tongue carcinoma. This woman did not present
the traditional risk factors related to oral cancer-alcohol, tobacco, or presence
of human papiloma virus (HPV). Both tumors were classified by a pathologist as
pT2. This patient was submitted to surgery, 6 months later was diagnosed with
cervical metastasis and in the following 2 months died. Copy number alterations
and methylation status of these 2 simultaneous tumors were analyzed using array
comparative genomic hybridization, multiplex ligation-dependent probe
amplification, and methylation specific multiplex ligation-dependent probe
amplification. In conclusion, in both tumors we identified several molecular
traits usually found among oral cavity tumors and some of those have been
associated with clinical outcome, reinforcing their importance to accurately
establish biomarkers with clinical applicability. Specific genomic and epigenetic
signatures for each of these 2 tumors were also observed allowing their molecular
discrimination. The tumor of the right side of the tongue exhibited more copy
number gains than the tumor of the left side. In the left side tumor less and
smaller copy number alterations and more methylated genes were observed, which
could be indicative of an early phase of tumor development. This case shows the
molecular heterogeneity of oral cavity tumors even in the same patient and
anatomic site, which could be the key to explain the different outcomes of oral
tumor patients.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.currproblcancer.2017.10.001 
PMID: 29056289  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
