

2948. Health Technol Assess. 2017 Nov;21(72):1-312. doi: 10.3310/hta21720.

Preventing blood-borne virus infection in people who inject drugs in the UK:
systematic review, stakeholder interviews, psychosocial intervention development 
and feasibility randomised controlled trial.

Gilchrist G(1), Swan D(1), Shaw A(2), Keding A(3), Towers S(4), Craine N(5),
Munro A(2), Hughes E(6), Parrott S(3), Mdege N(3), Strang J(1), Taylor A(2),
Watson J(3).

Author information: 
(1)National Addiction Centre, Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology and
Neuroscience, King's College London, London, UK.
(2)School of Media, Culture and Society, University of the West of Scotland,
Paisley, UK.
(3)Department of Health Sciences, University of York, York, UK.
(4)Betsi Cadwaladr University Health Board, Bangor, UK.
(5)Public Health Wales, Microbiology, Bangor, UK.
(6)Centre for Applied Research in Health, School of Human and Health Sciences,
University of Huddersfield, Huddersfield, UK.

BACKGROUND: Opioid substitution therapy and needle exchanges have reduced
blood-borne viruses (BBVs) among people who inject drugs (PWID). Some PWID
continue to share injecting equipment.
OBJECTIVES: To develop an evidence-based psychosocial intervention to reduce BBV 
risk behaviours and increase transmission knowledge among PWID, and conduct a
feasibility trial among PWID comparing the intervention with a control.
DESIGN: A pragmatic, two-armed randomised controlled, open feasibility trial.
Service users were Steering Group members and co-developed the intervention. Peer
educators co-delivered the intervention in London.
SETTING: NHS or third-sector drug treatment or needle exchanges in Glasgow,
London, Wrexham and York, recruiting January and February 2016.
PARTICIPANTS: Current PWID, aged ≥ 18 years.
INTERVENTIONS: A remote, web-based computer randomisation system allocated
participants to a three-session, manualised, psychosocial, gender-specific group 
intervention delivered by trained facilitators and BBV transmission information
booklet plus treatment as usual (TAU) (intervention), or information booklet plus
TAU (control).
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Recruitment, retention and follow-up rates measured
feasibility. Feedback questionnaires, focus groups with participants who attended
at least one intervention session and facilitators assessed the intervention's
acceptability.
RESULTS: A systematic review of what works to reduce BBV risk behaviours among
PWID; in-depth interviews with PWID; and stakeholder and expert consultation
informed the intervention. Sessions covered improving injecting technique and
good vein care; planning for risky situations; and understanding BBV
transmission. Fifty-six per cent (99/176) of eligible PWID were randomised: 52 to
the intervention group and 47 to the control group. Only 24% (8/34) of male and
11% (2/18) of female participants attended all three intervention sessions.
Overall, 50% (17/34) of men and 33% (6/18) of women randomised to the
intervention group and 47% (14/30) of men and 53% (9/17) of women randomised to
the control group were followed up 1 month post intervention. Variations were
reported by location. The intervention was acceptable to both participants and
facilitators. At 1 month post intervention, no increase in injecting in 'risky'
sites (e.g. groin, neck) was reported by participants who attended at least one
session. PWID who attended at least one session showed a trend towards greater
reduction in injecting risk behaviours, a greater increase in withdrawal planning
and were more confident about finding a vein. A mean cost of £58.17 per
participant was calculated for those attending one session, £148.54 for those
attending two sessions and £270.67 for those attending all three sessions,
compared with £0.86 in the control group. Treatment costs across the centres vary
as a result of the different levels of attendance, as total session costs are
divided by attendees to obtain a cost per attendee. The economic analysis
suggests that a cost-effectiveness study would be feasible given the response
rates and completeness of data. However, we have identified aspects where the
service use questionnaire could be abbreviated given the low numbers reported in 
several care domains. No adverse events were reported.
CONCLUSIONS: As only 19% of participants attended all three intervention sessions
and 47% were followed up 1 month post intervention, a future definitive
randomised controlled trial of the intervention is not feasible. Exposure to
information on improving injecting techniques did not encourage riskier injecting
practices or injecting frequency, and benefits were reported among attendees. The
intervention has the potential to positively influence BBV prevention. Harm
reduction services should ensure that the intervention content is routinely
delivered to PWID to improve vein care and prevent BBVs.
FUTURE WORK: The intervention did not meet the complex needs of some PWID, more
tailoring may be needed to reach PWID who are more frequent injectors, who are
homeless and female.
LIMITATIONS: Intervention delivery proved more feasible in London than other
locations. Non-attendance at the York trial site substantially influenced the
results.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: Current Controlled Trials ISRCTN66453696 and PROSPERO
014:CRD42014012969.
FUNDING: This project was funded by the National Institute for Health Research
Health Technology Assessment programme and will be published in full in Health
Technology Assessment; Vol. 21, No. 72. See the NIHR Journals Library website for
further project information.

DOI: 10.3310/hta21720 
PMCID: PMC5733383
PMID: 29208190  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
