

2961. Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol. 2017 May;118(5):621-628.e1. doi:
10.1016/j.anai.2017.02.012.

Physicians' experience and opinion on contraindications to allergen
immunotherapy: The CONSIT survey.

Rodríguez Del Rio P(1), Pitsios C(2), Tsoumani M(3), Pfaar O(4), Paraskevopoulos 
G(5), Gawlik R(6), Valovirta E(7), Larenas-Linnemann D(8), Demoly P(9), Calderón 
MA(10).

Author information: 
(1)Allergy Section, Children's University Hospital "Niño Jesús", Madrid, Spain.
Electronic address: prodriguezd@salud.madrid.org.
(2)Medical School, University of Cyprus, Nicosia, Cyprus.
(3)Centre for Respiratory Medicine and Allergy, University Hospital of South
Manchester and Manchester Academic Health Science Centre, The University of
Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom.
(4)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, Universitätsmedizin 
Mannheim, Medical Faculty Mannheim, Heidelberg University, Mannheim, Germany;
Center for Rhinology and Allergology, Wiesbaden, Germany.
(5)Allergy Outpatient Clinic, 401 General Military Hospital of Athens, Athens,
Greece.
(6)Department of Internal Medicine, Allergy and Clinical Immunology, Silesian
University of Medicine, Katowice, Poland.
(7)Terveystalo Turku, Allergy Clinic, University of Turku, Turku, Finland.
(8)Hospital Medica Sur, Mexico DF, Mexico.
(9)Département de Pneumologie et Addictologie, Hôpital Arnaud de Villeneuve,
University Hospital of Montpellier; Sorbonne Universités, UPMC Paris 06, UMR-S
1136, IPLESP, Equipe EPAR, 75013, Paris, France.
(10)Section of Allergy and Clinical Immunology, Imperial College London, National
Heart and Lung Institute and Royal Brompton Hospital NSH, London, United Kingdom.

BACKGROUND: Allergen immunotherapy (AIT) is the only disease-modifying treatment 
in allergy but several contraindications limit its use.
OBJECTIVE: To collect the outcome of using AIT in theoretically contraindicated
situations in real patients in the Contraindications to Specific ImmunoTherapy
(CONSIT) survey.
METHODS: The CONSIT is an electronic European Academy of Allergy and Clinical
Immunology survey conducted to gather the safety outcomes of patients undergoing 
subcutaneous, sublingual, or venom AIT and the opinions of physicians on each of 
17 selected conditions: children younger than 5 years; starting AIT during
pregnancy; controlled severe asthma; arrhythmias; coronary disease; cancer;
autoimmune disease; bone marrow and solid organ transplantation; human
immunodeficiency virus and acquired immunodeficiency syndrome; previous
anaphylaxis during AIT; use of β-blockers, angiotensin-converting inhibitors,
cyclosporine, and methotrexate; and inability to communicate. Safety using AIT
was reported in a 3-point scale: 1, "no problems"; 2, "minor problems" (requiring
only dose modifications); and 3, "major problems" (AIT not tolerated). Each
physician was asked about the degree of contraindication that each condition
should have: no contraindication (score 1), relative contraindication (score 2), 
or absolute contraindication (score 3).
RESULTS: Five hundred twenty physicians (75% Europeans, 89% allergists) reported 
on approximately 45,000 patients undergoing AIT with any of these conditions.
Major problems were infrequent, occurring more frequently in patients with asthma
(9.9%) and with previous anaphylaxis from AIT (9.5%). Regarding opinions,
experienced physicians scored a significantly lower mean for all conditions than 
non-experienced physicians for all routes.
CONCLUSION: Major problems were infrequent and experienced physicians were less
likely to be restrictive in the use of AIT.

Copyright © 2017 American College of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.anai.2017.02.012 
PMID: 28477792  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
