

2963. Acta Med Croatica. 2015;69(5):431-8.

[ASSOCIATION OF SKIN PHOTOTYPE AND UV EXPOSURE WITH EXPRESSION OF HER RECEPTORS, 
Ki67 AND p53 IN PATIENTS WITH CUTANEOUS SQUAMOUS CELL CARCINOMA].

[Article in Croatian]

Drvar DL, Lipozenčić J, Mokos ZB, Ilić I, Knežević F.

An increase in the incidence of cancer, in particular skin cancer, has been
observed in the last few decades. Skin cancer represents a significant public
health problem in Croatia and worldwide. Cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma (cSCC)
is a malignant tumor arising in epidermal keratinocytes. Together with basal cell
carcinoma it belongs to non-melanoma skin cancers, which are the most common
cancers in humans. The lifetime risk of cSCC development in Caucasian population 
is nowadays estimated to about 15%, which makes it double compared to 20 years
ago. The most probable causes are increased ultraviolet light (UV) exposure
(exposure to artificial UV sources in suntan parlors, spending more time
outdoors, changes in fashion, as well as ozone holes), and longer life
expectancy. In its etiopathogenesis, important risk factors include genetic
factors, fair-skin phototype, UV exposure, chronic degenerative and inflammatory 
conditions, chemical factors, oncogenic viruses, immunosuppression, ionizing
radiation, as well as habitual risk factors. Human epidermal growth factor
receptor (HER) family is involved in the control of multiple signal pathways.
Their dysregulation is associated with development of many cancers such as breast
carcinoma, non-small cell lung carcinoma, ovarian carcinoma, carcinoma of
pancreas, head and neck carcinoma, as well as glioblastoma. The objective of our 
investigation was to establish if there is association of the skin phototype and 
UV exposure with the expression of HER receptors, Ki67 and p53 in patients with
cSCC. Study group included 101 cSCC patients. Inclusion criteria were age >50,
both sexes, histopathologically confirmed cSCC, no previous therapy, specimens
sufficient for immunohistochemistry, and complete clinical data collected by a
questionnaire. Material obtained by excisional biopsy was completely
histopathologically evaluated and additional tissue slices were
immunohistochemically analyzed. Statistical analysis of the sample included
non-parametrical statistical methods and statistical reviews. Analysis was done
using R statistical package. Statistical significance was set at p<0.05. The
following skin phototypes (according to Fitzpatrick) were present in our study:
54 (53.47%) patients with phototype II and 47 (46.53%) patients with phototype
III. The majority of patients (n=93; 92.08%) were exposed to increased UV
radiation during lifetime. Forty (39.60%) patients had three or more sunburns
during childhood. Study results showed a signifi cantly higher expression of EGFR
receptors, Ki67 and protein p53 in patients with light skin phototype that had
been exposed to increased UV light during lifetime or had acquired 3 or more
sunburns in childhood, suggesting that UV exposure led to the induction of EGFR, 
Ki67 and protein p53, and consequently to development of cSCC.


PMID: 29087088  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
