

2974. Laryngoscope. 2012 Dec;122(12):2621-7. doi: 10.1002/lary.23517. Epub 2012 Sep 7.

Expression of microRNA machinery proteins in different types of chronic
rhinosinusitis.

Zhang YN(1), Cao PP, Zhang XH, Lu X, Liu Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Tongji Hospital, Tongji
Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, PR China.

OBJECTIVES/HYPOTHESIS: Dysregulation of microRNAs (miRNAs) has recently been
shown in chronic rhinosinusitis (CRS), the biogenesis and function of which are
modulated by miRNA machinery proteins. The expression of these proteins in
inflammatory airway diseases is unclear. The aim of this study was to investigate
the expression of miRNA machinery components in CRS.
STUDY DESIGN: Case-control experimental study.
METHODS: The mRNA expression levels of miRNA machinery components including
Drosha, Dicer, protein activator of the interferon-induced protein kinase (PACT),
human immunodeficiency virus transactivating response RNA-binding protein,
fragile X mental retardation protein, and argonaute 2/eukaryotic translation
initiation factor 2C, 2 in nasal biopsies from control, CRS without nasal polyps 
(CRSsNP), eosinophilic, and noneosinophilic CRS with nasal polyps (CRSwNP)
subjects were determined by quantitative reverse transcription polymerase chain
reaction. Immunohistochemical staining was employed to examine the protein
expression of PACT and the cellular source of PACT.
RESULTS: Among the tested components, only PACT mRNA expression was found to be
altered in CRS, the levels of which were upregulated in CRSwNP as compared with
control. In comparison with control and CRSsNP, PACT protein expression was also 
significantly upregulated in CRSwNP, with a further increase in eosinophilic
CRSwNP. PACT was mainly expressed in CD138(+) plasma cells. A higher percentage
of PACT-positive plasma cells in total plasma cells was detected in eosinophilic 
CRSwNP than in noneosinophilic CRSwNP. PACT protein expression correlated with
disease severity and eosinophil infiltration.
CONCLUSIONS: PACT may be associated with the plasma cell function and
eosinophilic inflammation in CRSwNP. However, further experimentation is needed
to clarify the functions of PACT.

Copyright © 2012 The American Laryngological, Rhinological, and Otological
Society, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/lary.23517 
PMID: 22961479  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
