

2985. Virus Res. 2018 Sep 2;256:1-5. doi: 10.1016/j.virusres.2018.07.017. Epub 2018 Jul
24.

Epstein-Barr virus infection associated with pepsinogens and Helicobacter pylori 
infection in patients with gastric cancer.

Su X(1), Ye Z(2), Wang Z(3), Long Y(2), Qiu M(4), He C(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Head and Neck, Sun Yat-Sen University Cancer Center, State Key
Laboratory of Oncology in South China, Collaborative Innovation Center for Cancer
Medicine, China.
(2)Department of Molecular Diagnostics, Sun Yat-Sen University Cancer Center,
State Key Laboratory of Oncology in South China, Collaborative Innovation Center 
for Cancer Medicine, Guangzhou, China.
(3)Tumor Etiology and Screening Department of Cancer Institute and General
Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital of China Medical University, Key
Laboratory of Cancer Etiology and Prevention of China Medical University,
Liaoning Provincial Education Department, Shenyang, Liaoning, China.
(4)Department of Medical Oncology, Sun Yat-Sen University Cancer Center, State
Key Laboratory of Oncology in South China, Collaborative Innovation Center for
Cancer Medicine, 651 Dongfeng Road East, Guangzhou, Guangdong 510060, China.
Electronic address: qiumzh@sysucc.org.cn.
(5)Department of Molecular Diagnostics, Sun Yat-Sen University Cancer Center,
State Key Laboratory of Oncology in South China, Collaborative Innovation Center 
for Cancer Medicine, Guangzhou, China. Electronic address: hecy@sysucc.org.cn.

BACKGROUND: There is no study reporting the influence of the Epstein-Barr virus
(EBV) infection on the biomarkers of gastric function like pepsinogen (PG) I and 
II in patients with gastric cancer, and the relationship between the infection of
EBV and Helicobacter pylori (HP) is unclear. This study focused on these issues.
METHODS: In this study, we detected the serum levels of PGI, PGII, anti-HP
(immunoglobulin G) IgG antibodies and EBV DNA load in a total of 189 gastric
cancer patients confirmed to be EBV positive or negative in tissue using in situ 
hybridization of EBV-encoded small RNAs (EBERs).
RESULTS: Compared to 123 EBV negative gastric cancer patients, the 66 patients
infected with EBV exhibited significant higher levels of PGI and PGI/II ratio and
meanwhile, had remarkably lower levels of anti-HP IgG. The prevalence of HP
infection in EBV positive patients was 13.6%, and 52.8% in EBV negative patients.
In subsequent analysis concerning the EBV DNA load, the patients were divided
into two groups by a cutoff value of 1000 copies/ml. The EBV DNA load showed
highly consistent association with PGI, PGI/II ratio and HP.
CONCLUSIONS: EBV infection in situ increased the serum levels of PGI and ratio of
PGI/PGII in gastric cancer patients. Moreover, the EBV infection exclusively
exists with HP infection in the patients with gastric cancer.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.virusres.2018.07.017 
PMID: 30053417  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
