

2989. Laryngoscope. 2010 Dec;120(12):2410-6. doi: 10.1002/lary.21146.

A comparison of two methods for preventing cross-contamination when using
flexible fiberoptic endoscopes in an otolaryngology clinic: disposable sterile
sheaths versus immersion in germicidal liquid.

Elackattu A(1), Zoccoli M, Spiegel JH, Grundfast KM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Boston University School
of Medicine, Boston, Massachusetts, USA. alphi.elackattu@bmc.org

OBJECTIVES/HYPOTHESIS: To assess the efficacy of using a sterile sheath to
prevent cross-contamination when using a fiberoptic nasopharnygolaryngoscope
(FNPL) in an otolaryngology clinic.
STUDY DESIGN: Prospective controlled trial.
METHODS: All FNPLs were disinfected according to applicable current guidelines
recommended by the US Center for Disease Control. Swabs were taken from multiple 
sites on 100 FNPLs for cultures to detect the presence of bacteria, viruses, or
both. Each FNPL was then assigned to either the sheath alone (experimental) or
germicidal immersion (control) group. After using an FNPL in a patient, swabs
were again taken so that a comparison could be made in microbes on the scopes.
Throughout the study, the steps in the disinfection process taken by medical
assistants as they worked with the FNPLs were observed and recorded.
RESULTS: Microbial counts on insertion shafts of FNLPs for the sheath and
immersion groups were similar, with 1/50 versus 0/50, respectively. Time spent
using the sheath method averaged 89 seconds, whereas immersion in the germicidal 
liquid took 14 minutes. No breaches in adherence to applicable protocols were
observed.
CONCLUSIONS: Using an individually packaged disposable sterile sheath on a FNLP
prevents microbes from adhering to the shaft of the scope, thus providing a
reasonably safe method of avoiding the transmission of infection from one patient
to the next patient when using an FNLP successively in multiple patients in an
otolaryngology clinic.

DOI: 10.1002/lary.21146 
PMID: 21046544  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
