

300. Virus Res. 2014 Sep 22;190:53-9. doi: 10.1016/j.virusres.2014.07.009. Epub 2014
Jul 16.

The control of anaplastic thyroid carcinoma cell lines by oncolytic poxviruses.

Mundi N(1), Um S(1), Yoo J(2), Rizzo G(1), Black M(1), Pinto N(1), Palma DA(3),
Fung K(2), MacNeil D(2), Mymryk JS(4), Barrett JW(5), Nichols AC(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology Head & Neck Surgery, Western University, London, 
ON, Canada.
(2)Department of Otolaryngology Head & Neck Surgery, Western University, London, 
ON, Canada; London Regional Cancer Program, London, ON, Canada; Department of
Oncology, Western University, London, ON, Canada.
(3)London Regional Cancer Program, London, ON, Canada; Lawson Health Research
Institute, London, ON, Canada; Department of Oncology, Western University,
London, ON, Canada.
(4)London Regional Cancer Program, London, ON, Canada; Lawson Health Research
Institute, London, ON, Canada; Department of Oncology, Western University,
London, ON, Canada; Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Western
University, London, ON, Canada.
(5)Department of Otolaryngology Head & Neck Surgery, Western University, London, 
ON, Canada; London Regional Cancer Program, London, ON, Canada; Lawson Health
Research Institute, London, ON, Canada. Electronic address:
John.Barrett@lhsc.on.ca.
(6)Department of Otolaryngology Head & Neck Surgery, Western University, London, 
ON, Canada; London Regional Cancer Program, London, ON, Canada; Lawson Health
Research Institute, London, ON, Canada; Department of Oncology, Western
University, London, ON, Canada. Electronic address: Anthony.Nichols@lhsc.on.ca.

BACKGROUND AND SIGNIFICANCE: Anaplastic thyroid cancer (ATC) is rare, but its
clinical presentation is often dramatic and aggressive and is nearly uniformly
fatal. Oncolytic viral therapy is a potential strategy to improve outcomes for
patients suffering with this disease.
METHODS: Seven established ATC cell lines were infected with a panel of
poxviruses to identify which virus had the most potential as an oncolytic agent. 
These included myxoma, vaccinia, and tanapox viruses, all modified to express
green fluorescence protein (GFP). Viral proliferation was assessed by
fluorescence and viral amplification. The effect on cell line growth was assessed
by the Presto Blue metabolic assay and a live-dead assay. A replication assay was
performed to assess the production of infectious progeny. An additional five ATC 
cell lines were tested using the assays described above for susceptibility to
vaccinia virus.
RESULTS: ATC cell lines were differentially susceptible to each virus. Vaccinia
virus was superior to myxoma and tanapox viruses for the control of anaplastic
thyroid cancer in vitro. Although subsequent investigation using an expanded
panel of cell lines revealed differential susceptibility to vaccinia virus,
effective control of cell proliferation was still achieved using higher titers.
CONCLUSIONS: Vaccinia virus was the most potent of the tested poxviruses and was 
highly effective in controlling proliferation and inducing cell death in ATC cell
lines. The efficacy of these viruses offers hope for improving outcomes for
patients suffering with ATC.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.virusres.2014.07.009 
PMID: 25038405  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
