

3007. Oncol Rep. 2012 Jan;27(1):270-80. doi: 10.3892/or.2011.1499. Epub 2011 Oct 12.

Chemotherapeutic alteration of β-catenin and c-kit expression by imatinib in
p16-positive squamous cell carcinoma compared to HPV-negative HNSCC cells in
vitro.

Schultz JD(1), Sommer JU, Hoedt S, Erben P, Hofheinz RD, Faber A, Thorn C,
Hörmann K, Sauter A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, Medical Faculty of
Mannheim, University of Heidelberg, Mannheim, Germany. johannes.schultz@umm.de

The most common neoplasm arising in the upper aerodigestive tract is head and
neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC). Tumor growth, invasion and systemic
dissemination is a multistep process of dysregulated cellular signaling pathways 
and an altered cell-cell and cell-matrix interaction. Aberrant Wnt/β-catenin
signaling is linked to tumor development and dissemination in several tumor
entities. β-catenin is a multifunctional protein within the canonical Wnt
pathway, which is an important factor for reducing cell-cell adhesion in
malignant tissue and for triggering cell cycle progression and unscheduled
proliferation. Another pivotal factor in carcinogenesis is the tyrosine kinase
receptor c-kit, which in the case of dysregulated expression is associated with
neoplastic transformation in epithelial tissue. This study evaluates the
expression pattern of secreted and nuclear β-catenin and c-kit in p16-positive
and HPV-negative squamous cell carcinomas (SCC) and the vulnerability of therapy 
with the tyrosine kinase inhibitor imatinib as a potential targeted treatment
modality compared to platinum-based chemotherapeutic drugs. The different
squamous tumor cell lines were incubated with increasing concentrations of
carboplatin (3 or 7.5 µmol/ml) and imatinib (18 or 30 µmol/ml). ELISA and
immunohistochemical methods were carried out after 48, 72, 120, 192 and 240 h. We
detected a reliable trend towards significantly decreased cytosolic and nuclear
β-catenin and c-kit expression levels in p16-positive SCC and non-HPV HNSCC cells
induced by imatinib exposure for an extended incubation period, whereas
platinum-based agents had no or, at best, a slight influence. Virus-transformed
squamous cell carcinoma (CERV196) cells were characterized by a reduced
susceptibility to an imatinib-altered β-catenin expression. Further studies are
planned to investigate this observance in HPV-positive HNSCC in vitro. The
implementation of a selective molecular therapy in established chemotherapeutic
regimes may enhance the efficacy of platinum-based chemotherapy without increased
toxicity and could thus improve the clinical outcome in HNSCC, irrespective of
the HPV status.

DOI: 10.3892/or.2011.1499 
PMID: 21993766  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
