

3012. Am J Otolaryngol. 2010 Mar-Apr;31(2):104-9. doi: 10.1016/j.amjoto.2008.11.010.
Epub 2009 Mar 27.

The dilemma of midline destructive lesions: a case series and diagnostic review.

Parker NP(1), Pearlman AN, Conley DB, Kern RC, Chandra RK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, University of Minnesota,
Minneapolis, MN, USA.

BACKGROUND: Midline destructive lesions (MDLs) of the nose are a diagnostic
dilemma due to an extensive differential diagnosis and vague presenting signs and
symptoms. Etiologies may be neoplastic, autoimmune, traumatic, infectious, or
unknown.
STUDY DESIGN: Case series and review of the literature were done.
METHODS: Medical records of 8 patients presenting with an MDL were reviewed.
RESULTS: Each patient received nasal endoscopy, computed tomography scan of the
sinuses, laboratory workup, culture (aerobes, anaerobes, fungus, and acid-fast
bacilli), and biopsy with flow cytometry. Laboratory tests included complete
blood count, basic metabolic panel, erythrocyte sedimentation rate,
angiotensin-converting enzyme, antineutrophil antibodies, rheumatoid factor,
anti-Ro and anti-La antibodies, Epstein-Barr virus antibodies, coccidiomycosis
serology, HIV antibodies, fluorescent treponemal antibody absorption, classic
antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies, perinuclear antineutrophil cytoplasmic
antibody, proteinase 3, and myeloperoxidase. Choice of diagnostic study was
individualized for each patient. Two patients were diagnosed with natural
killer/T-cell lymphoma, 2 were diagnosed with Wegener's granulomatosis, and 4
remained idiopathic, despite the extensive workup. A diagnostic algorithm to aid 
in the approach to MDLs is presented.
CONCLUSIONS: The diagnosis of MDLs remains difficult but is aided by a systematic
approach and familiarity with multiple diagnostic techniques. It is imperative to
take multiple tissue specimens from various sites, send them fresh, and
communicate suspicion of lymphoma. Despite diagnostic advances and improved
understanding of the diseases underlying MDLs, an etiology is often not
identified.

Copyright (c) 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.amjoto.2008.11.010 
PMID: 20015726  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
