

3022. Harefuah. 2017 Oct;156(10):645-649.

[GLOBAL INCIDENCE AND RISK FACTORS OF ORAL CANCER].

[Article in Hebrew]

Ghantous Y(1), Abu Elnaaj I(1).

Author information: 
(1)The Padeh Baruch Medical Center, Poriya.

INTRODUCTION: Cancer of the oral cavity (Oral cancer) is the 11th most common
malignancy in the world. Despite the general global trend of a slight decrease in
the incidence of oral cancer, tongue cancer incidence is increasing. The
incidence and mortality caused by this tumor show variability according to the
geographic location in which it is diagnosed. However, in the last decade an
increase was observed in the percentage of young patients, especially patients
with tongue cancer. The main risk factors of head and neck cancer worldwide are
smoking and alcohol, as well as DNA oncogenic viruses and habits, such as betel
nut.
METHODS: Data were collected from worldwide databases, such as Survival
Epidemiology and End Result (SEER), The National Center of Health Statistics
(NCHS) and GLOBCAN (2012) IARC.
RESULTS: In 2012, 369,200 new cases of oral cancer were reported worldwide, with 
two-thirds of the tumors diagnosed in developing countries. These tumors are
responsible for approximately 145,328 deaths worldwide per year. The highest
incidence of these cancers is mainly reported in South and Southeast Asia and
some countries in southern Europe. Prevalence and clinical pattern of OSCC varies
greatly, depending on geographical location while diagnosed.
DISCUSSION: As described in our review, the incidence of and mortality due to
oral tumors pose a significant health problem in many aspects all around the
world, and differences exist in the behavior of these tumors. We witnessed more
cases of anterior tongue cancers mainly affecting the young age patient group.
Several countries in Europe showed a significant increase in oral cancer
prevalence, such as in Germany. Studies have reported an alarming lack of
awareness about oral cancer, its symptoms, causes, and these gaps in knowledge
need to be addressed by further public education, possibly targeted to high-risk 
groups. With the awareness to risk factors, primary prevention through the
elimination of tobacco consumption, moderation of alcohol intake and
chemoprevention are urgently needed.


PMID: 29072384  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
