

3028. J Infect Dis. 2016 Sep 1;214(5):722-31. doi: 10.1093/infdis/jiw230. Epub 2016 May
30.

Live Attenuated Influenza Vaccine in Children Induces B-Cell Responses in
Tonsils.

Mohn KG(1), Brokstad KA(2), Pathirana RD(1), Bredholt G(1), Jul-Larsen Å(1),
Trieu MC(1), Lartey SL(1), Montomoli E(3), Tøndel C(4), Aarstad HJ(5), Cox RJ(6).

Author information: 
(1)The Influenza Center.
(2)Broegelmann Research Laboratory, Department of Clinical Science.
(3)Department of Molecular and Developmental Medicine, University of Siena
VisMederi, Siena, Italy.
(4)Department of Clinical Medicine, University of Bergen Department of
Pediatrics.
(5)Department of Clinical Medicine, University of Bergen Department of
Otolaryngology/Head and Neck Surgery.
(6)The Influenza Center Department of Research & Development, Haukeland
University Hospital, Bergen K.G. Jebsen Center for Influenza Vaccines, University
of Bergen, Norway.

Erratum in
    J Infect Dis. 2016 Oct 3;:.

BACKGROUND: Tonsils play a key role in eliciting immune responses against
respiratory pathogens. Little is known about how tonsils contribute to the local 
immune response after intranasal vaccination. Here, we uniquely report the
mucosal humoral responses in tonsils and saliva after intranasal live attenuated 
influenza vaccine (LAIV) vaccination in children.
METHODS: Blood, saliva, and tonsils samples were collected from 39 children
before and after LAIV vaccination and from 16 age-matched, nonvaccinated
controls. Serum antibody responses were determined by a hemagglutination
inhibition (HI) assay. The salivary immunoglobulin A (IgA) level was measured by 
an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. Antibody-secreting cell (ASC) and memory
B-cell (MBC) responses were enumerated in tonsils and blood.
RESULTS: Significant increases were observed in levels of serum antibodies and
salivary IgA to influenza A(H3N2) and influenza B virus strains as early as 14
days after vaccination but not to influenza A(H1N1). Influenza virus-specific
salivary IgA levels correlated with serum HI responses, making this a new
possible indicator of vaccine immunogenicity in children. LAIV augmented
influenza virus-specific B-cell responses in tonsils and blood. Tonsillar MBC
responses correlated with systemic MBC and serological responses. Naive children 
showed significant increases in MBC counts after LAIV vaccination.
CONCLUSIONS: This is the first study to demonstrate that LAIV elicits humoral
B-cell responses in tonsils of young children. Furthermore, salivary IgA analysis
represents an easy method for measuring immunogenicity after vaccination.

© The Author 2016. Published by Oxford University Press for the Infectious
Diseases Society of America.

DOI: 10.1093/infdis/jiw230 
PMCID: PMC4978372
PMID: 27247344  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
