

3040. J Chin Med Assoc. 2016 Aug;79(8):440-4. doi: 10.1016/j.jcma.2016.03.002. Epub
2016 Jun 6.

Detection of Streptococcus pneumoniae and Moraxella catarrhalis in patients with 
paranasal chronic sinusitis by polymerase chain reaction method.

Farajzadeh Sheikh A(1), Ahmadi K(2), Nikakhlagh S(3).

Author information: 
(1)Health Research Institute, Infectious and Tropical Diseases Research Center,
Department of Microbiology, Medicine Faculty, Ahvaz Jundishapur University of
Medical Sciences, Ahvaz, Iran.
(2)Department of Microbiology, Medicine Faculty, Ahvaz Jundishapur University of 
Medical Sciences, Ahvaz, Iran. Electronic address: kh.ahmadi53@gmail.com.
(3)Head and Neck Surgery, Hearing and Speech Research Center, Ahvaz Jundishapur
University of Medical Sciences, Ahvaz, Iran.

BACKGROUND: Sinusitis is a complex involvement of the upper respiratory system by
bacteria, viruses, fungi, or other allergens. Streptococcus pneumoniae,
Haemophilus influenzae, and Moraxella catarrhalis are the dominant bacterial
microorganisms involved in acute sinusitis, whereas in chronic sinusitis,
Staphylococcus aureus and some anaerobic bacteria are the prevailing pathogens.
Appropriate antibiotic treatment requires sinusitis bacteriology assessment. The 
aim of this study was to isolate bacteria in clinical samples from patients with 
chronic sinusitis.
METHODS: A total of 55 samples were collected from patients with chronic
sinusitis undergoing surgery at Imam Khomeini Hospital in Ahvaz, Iran. Samples
were cultured in conventional medium, and for each culture, Gram staining,
catalase, coagulase, oxidase, and DNAse tests were performed and isolates were
stored for polymerase chain reaction analysis.
RESULTS: Twenty-three isolates were obtained from five patients, including S.
aureus (23.6%), Rhizomucor (1.8%), and Escherichia (1.8%) by the culture method
and M. catarrhalis (3.6%) and S. Pneumoniae (7.2%) by the polymerase chain
reaction method. Compared with acute sinusitis, the microbiology of chronic
sinusitis remains controversial. Results are affected by many factors, including 
diversity of molecular and culture methods, sterilization of sampling area,
sample transfer to laboratory, use of antibiotics prior to surgery, and nasal
polyps.
CONCLUSION: In Iran, the causative agents of chronic sinusitis are similar to
those in other countries. Compared with other bacteria, S. aureus was observed
more often in asthmatic patients with sinusitis.

Copyright © 2016. Published by Elsevier Taiwan LLC.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jcma.2016.03.002 
PMID: 27282403  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
