

3081. Am Soc Clin Oncol Educ Book. 2015:e519-26. doi: 10.14694/EdBook_AM.2015.35.e519.

Merkel cell carcinoma: emerging biology, current approaches, and future
directions.

Tothill R(1), Estall V(1), Rischin D(1).

Author information: 
(1)From the Division of Research, Peter MacCallum Cancer Centre, and the Sir
Peter MacCallum Department of Oncology, University of Melbourne, Melbourne,
Australia; Department of Radiation Oncology and Skin and Melanoma Tumour Stream, 
Peter MacCallum Cancer Centre, and the Department of Pathology, University of
Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia; Division of Cancer Medicine, and Head and Neck
Tumour Stream, Peter MacCallum Cancer Centre, the Sir Peter MacCallum Department 
of Oncology and Department of Medicine, University of Melbourne, Melbourne,
Australia.

Merkel cell carcinoma (MCC) is an aggressive neuroendocrine cutaneous cancer that
predominantly occurs in patients who are older, and is associated with a high
rate of distant failure and mortality. Current management strategies that
incorporate surgery and radiotherapy achieve high rates of locoregional control, 
but distant failure rates remain problematic, highlighting the need for new
effective systemic therapies. Chemotherapy can achieve high response rates of
limited duration in the metastatic setting, but its role in definitive management
remains unproven. Recent developments in our knowledge about the biology of MCC
have led to the identification of new potential therapeutic targets and
treatments. A key finding has been the discovery that a human polyomavirus may be
a causative agent. However, emerging data suggests that MCC may actually be two
distinct entities, viral-associated and viral-negative MCC, which is likely to
have implications for the management of MCC in the future and for the development
of new treatments. In this review, we discuss recent discoveries about the
biology of MCC, current approaches to management, and new therapeutic strategies 
that are being investigated.

DOI: 10.14694/EdBook_AM.2015.35.e519 
PMID: 25993218  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
