

3082. J Endocrinol Invest. 2014 Apr;37(4):313-22. doi: 10.1007/s40618-014-0051-3. Epub 
2014 Jan 24.

Benign prostatic hyperplasia: a new metabolic disease?

Vignozzi L(1), Rastrelli G, Corona G, Gacci M, Forti G, Maggi M.

Author information: 
(1)Sexual Medicine and Andrology Unit, Department of Experimental and Clinical
Biomedical Sciences, University of Florence, Viale Pieraccini 6, 50139, Florence,
Italy.

BACKGROUND: Benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH) and lower urinary tract symptoms
(LUTS) are conditions extremely prevalent in the aging male. Although androgens
are involved in prostate growth during developmental age, their role in the
pathogenesis of BPH/LUTS is debated. Recent data indicate that low testosterone
and high estradiol favor disease progression. In addition, the role of other
determinants, such as metabolic syndrome or prostate inflammation, is emerging.
AIM: We reviewed the evidence regarding the pathogenesis of BPH/LUTS with
particular attention to metabolic influence.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: A review of published evidence was performed using
Medline.
RESULTS: Available evidence shows that a three-hit hypothesis can be drawn. An
overt, or even a subclinical, bacterial or viral infection could induce prostatic
inflammation (first hit) that could be autosustained or exacerbated by the
presence of an altered metabolism and in particular by hypercholesterolemia
(second hit). Hypogonadism and/or hyperestrogenism could act as a third hit,
favoring the maintenance of this inflammatory state. The combined action of all
three hits, or even two of them, may result in overexpression of Toll-like
receptors (TLRs), transformation of prostatic cells into antigen-presenting cells
and activation of resident human prostate-associated lymphoid tissue ending in
overproduction of growth factors which, in turn, will induce prostate remodeling 
and further prostate enlargement. The mechanical obstruction, along with the
direct action of the unfavorable metabolic and hormonal milieu on the bladder
neck, helps in generating LUTS.
CONCLUSION: Inflammation, dyslipidemia and altered sex-steroid milieu mutually
concur in determining BPH/LUTS.

DOI: 10.1007/s40618-014-0051-3 
PMID: 24458832  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
