

3103. World J Surg. 2009 Apr;33(4):685-97. doi: 10.1007/s00268-008-9825-0.

Nonviral delivery for genomic therapy of cancer.

Templeton NS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Baylor College of Medicine, One 
Baylor Plaza, M/S 390, Houston, TX 77030, USA. NANCYT@bcm.tmc.edu

We have developed improved liposomal nanoparticles that efficiently condense
nucleic acids, proteins, viruses, drugs, and mixtures of these agents on the
interior of bilamellar invaginated structures (BIVs) produced by a novel
extrusion procedure. The liposomal complexes have extended half-life in the
circulation, serum stability, and broad biodistribution; are targetable to
specific organs and cell types; can penetrate through tight barriers in several
organs; are fusogenic with cell membranes and avoid endosomes; are optimized for 
nucleic acid:lipid ratio and colloidal suspension in vivo; can be size
fractionated to produce totally homogeneous populations of complexes prior to
injection; are nontoxic, nonimmunogenic, and can be repeatedly administered; and 
they are stable in liquid suspensions and freeze-dried formulations. We can add
specific ligands either by ionic interactions or by covalent attachments to the
surface of these nucleic acid-liposome complexes to accomplish targeted delivery 
to specific cell surface receptors. Furthermore, the charge on the surface of
these complexes can be modified to avoid uptake by nontarget cells using our
novel technology called "reversible masking." We have also achieved high-dose
systemic delivery of these complexes without toxicity in vivo by further
purification of plasmid DNA. At present, these complexes are injected
intravenously into patients in clinical trials to treat lung cancer and will be
used in upcoming trials to treat breast, pancreatic, and head and neck cancers.
Notably, BIV complexes are being injected intravenously into patients with
non-small-cell lung carcinoma who have failed to respond to chemotherapy. These
patients are living longer and have demonstrated objective responses, including
tumor regression.

DOI: 10.1007/s00268-008-9825-0 
PMID: 19023615  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
