

3116. Thorax. 2015 Apr;70(4):353-8. doi: 10.1136/thoraxjnl-2014-205520. Epub 2015 Jan
6.

A chest physician's guide to mechanisms of sinonasal disease.

Hox V(1), Maes T(2), Huvenne W(3), Van Drunen C(4), Vanoirbeek JA(5), Joos G(2), 
Bachert C(3), Fokkens W(4), Ceuppens JL(6), Nemery B(5), Hellings PW(1).

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Division of Otorhinolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, University
Hospitals Leuven, Leuven, Belgium Laboratory of Clinical Immunology, Department
of Microbiology and Immunology, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.
(2)Laboratory for Translational Research in Obstructive Pulmonary Diseases,
Department of Respiratory Medicine, Ghent University Hospital, Belgium.
(3)Upper Airways Research Laboratory, Department of Otorhinolaryngology-Head and 
Neck Surgery, University of Ghent, Belgium.
(4)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam, The
Netherlands.
(5)Research Unit of Lung Toxicology, Department of Public Health, K U Leuven,
Leuven, Belgium.
(6)Laboratory of Clinical Immunology, Department of Microbiology and Immunology, 
KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.

The upper and lower airways are closely linked from an anatomical, histological
and immunological point of view, with inflammation in one part of the airways
influencing the other part. Despite the concept of global airway disease, the
upper airways tend to be overlooked by respiratory physicians. We provide a
clinical overview of the most important and recent insights in rhinitis and
rhinosinusitis in relation to lower airway disease. We focus on the various
exogenous and endogenous factors that play a role in the development and
aggravation of chronic upper airway inflammation. In addition to the classical
inhaled allergens or microorganisms with well-defined pathophysiological
mechanisms in upper airway disease, environmental substances such as cigarette
smoke, diesel exhaust particles and occupational agents affecting lower airway
homeostasis have recently gained attention in upper airway research. We are only 
at the beginning of understanding the complex interplay between exogenous and
endogenous factors like genetic, immunological and hormonal influences on chronic
upper airway inflammation. From a clinical perspective, the involvement of upper 
and lower airway disease in one patient can only be fully appreciated by doctors 
capable of understanding the interplay between upper and lower airway
inflammation.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not
already granted under a licence) please go to
http://group.bmj.com/group/rights-licensing/permissions.

DOI: 10.1136/thoraxjnl-2014-205520 
PMID: 25563773  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
