

3120. Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol. 2018 Dec;127(12):974-977. doi:
10.1177/0003489418803391. Epub 2018 Sep 29.

Low-Grade Papillary Schneiderian Carcinoma of the Sinonasal Cavity and Temporal
Bone.

Brown CS(1), Abi Hachem R(1), Pendse A(2), Madden JF(2), Francis HW(1).

Author information: 
(1)1 Division of Head and Neck Surgery & Communication Sciences, Department of
Surgery, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC, USA.
(2)2 Department of Pathology, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC, USA.

OBJECTIVES:: The aim of this study was to further characterize a newly described 
neoplasm, low-grade papillary Schneiderian carcinoma, occurring simultaneously in
the sinonasal cavity and mastoid. Additionally, the authors review the only 2
similar cases within the literature and describe the common clinical features,
radiographic findings, and pathologic characteristics of this exceptionally rare 
disease process.
METHODS:: Chart review for single patient, review of literature.
RESULTS:: The patient presented with bilateral nasal obstruction. Computed
tomography revealed a left sinonasal mass with skull base hyperostosis, and
follow-up magnetic resonance imaging showed a concomitant olfactory groove
meningioma. Examination showed a bilateral, completely obstructing sinonasal mass
with skip areas, and biopsy confirmed inverted papilloma (human papilloma virus
strains 16 and 18 indeterminate). The patient underwent bilateral endoscopic
sinus surgery, left medial maxillectomy, and left partial nasopharyngectomy.
Given her multifocal disease, she was advised that she would require additional
excision, but was lost to follow up. One year later she developed acute left
facial paralysis. Magnetic resonance imaging demonstrated an enhancing mass in
the left mastoid with enhancement along the Eustachian tube in addition to her
known recurrent sinonasal disease. Simultaneous endoscopic sinus surgery and
mastoidectomy were performed. Polypoid tissue was removed from the nasopharynx,
mesotympanum, epitympanum, and retrofacial air cells. Immunohistochemistry showed
that cells stained positive for p63 and dermCK and negative for synaptophysin.
Morphologically, cells were bland, without classic stromal invasion, retaining
their smooth, cystic, and papillary features, despite their increased depth
within the tissue. Upon further review and consultation with an outside
pathologist, a diagnosis of low-grade papillary Schneiderian carcinoma was made. 
The patient was referred for radiation therapy and is disease free at 3-month
follow-up, with return of her facial function.
CONCLUSIONS:: This case represents the first report of concurrent low-grade
papillary Schneiderian carcinoma of both the nasal cavity and mastoid. It
emphasizes the importance of recognizing this new entity through pathologic
analysis and suspecting it when the clinical course does not follow an expected
pattern.

DOI: 10.1177/0003489418803391 
PMID: 30269519  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
