
Conflict of interest statement: The authors of this article and the planning
committee members and staff have no relevant financial relationships with
commercial interests to disclose.


3123. Swiss Med Wkly. 2010 May;140(19-20):273-9. doi: smw-12844.

Undifferentiated carcinoma of nasopharyngeal type (UCNT): a Swiss
single-institutional experience during 1990-2005.

Sidler D(1), Thum P, Winterhalder R, Huber G, Haerle SK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, University Hospital
Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.

BACKGROUND: Nasopharyngeal carcinoma is a rare tumor entity in Switzerland. In
contrast, it is endemic in Asian and African countries. Retrospective studies
have been conducted in order to identify risk factors and prognostic determinants
of nasopharyngeal carcinoma. Nonetheless, these trials were mostly conducted in
regions with high prevalence for the disease and little is known about the risk
factors and prognosis of nasopharyngeal carcinoma for a non-endemic population in
Western Europe.
METHODS: This retrospective trial was conducted to identify risk factors and
prognostic determinants of nasopharyngeal carcinoma for a non-endemic population 
in Switzerland.
RESULTS: Overall survival was 91%, 77% and 58% for one, three and five years,
respectively. Factors with favourable prognostic value were concomitant
radiochemotherapy regimens, photon radiotherapy, and a delay between diagnosis
and first therapy session of less than ten weeks, respectively. Factors with
unfavourable prognostic values were age over 65 years at time of diagnosis and
nasopharyngeal carcinoma of WHO type I.
CONCLUSION: Risk factors, biological behaviour and survival are well comparable
between endemic and non-endemic populations for nasopharyngeal carcinoma.
Nonetheless, an aggressive diagnostic procedure and sophisticated
interdisciplinary therapy are indispensable in order to achieve favourable
outcome. Therefore, diagnosis and therapy of nasopharyngeal carcinoma in
non-endemic populations should be limited to highly specialized tertiary centres.

DOI: smw-12844 
PMID: 19950040  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
