

3129. J Infect Dis. 2015 Feb 15;211(4):539-48. doi: 10.1093/infdis/jiu499. Epub 2014
Sep 1.

Low bone mineral density in patients with well-suppressed HIV infection:
association with body weight, smoking, and prior advanced HIV disease.

Kooij KW(1), Wit FW(2), Bisschop PH(3), Schouten J(4), Stolte IG(5), Prins M(5), 
van der Valk M(6), Prins JM(6), van Eck-Smit BL(7), Lips P(8), Reiss P(9); AGEhIV
Cohort Study group.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Global Health, Academic Medical Center and Amsterdam Institute
for Global Health and Development.
(2)Department of Global Health, Academic Medical Center and Amsterdam Institute
for Global Health and Development Division of Infectious Diseases and Center for 
Infection and Immunity Amsterdam (CINIMA).
(3)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism.
(4)Department of Global Health, Academic Medical Center and Amsterdam Institute
for Global Health and Development Department of Neurology.
(5)Division of Infectious Diseases and Center for Infection and Immunity
Amsterdam (CINIMA) Public Health Service Amsterdam, Infectious Diseases Research.
(6)Division of Infectious Diseases and Center for Infection and Immunity
Amsterdam (CINIMA).
(7)Department of Nuclear Medicine, Academic Medical Center.
(8)Department of Internal Medicine/Endocrinology, VU University Medical Center.
(9)Department of Global Health, Academic Medical Center and Amsterdam Institute
for Global Health and Development Division of Infectious Diseases and Center for 
Infection and Immunity Amsterdam (CINIMA) Stichting HIV Monitoring, Amsterdam,
The Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) and combination antiretroviral
therapy (cART) may both contribute to the higher prevalence of osteoporosis and
osteopenia in HIV-infected individuals.
METHODS: Using dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry, we compared lumbar spine, total 
hip, and femoral neck bone mineral density (BMD) in 581 HIV-positive (94.7%
receiving cART) and 520 HIV-negative participants of the AGEhIV Cohort Study,
aged ≥45 years. We used multivariable linear regression to investigate
independent associations between HIV, HIV disease characteristics, ART, and BMD.
RESULTS: The study population largely consisted of men who have sex with men
(MSM). Osteoporosis was significantly more prevalent in those with HIV infection 
(13.3% vs 6.7%; P<.001). After adjustment for body weight and smoking, being
HIV-positive was no longer independently associated with BMD. Low body weight was
more strongly negatively associated with BMD in HIV-positive persons with a
history of a Centers for Disease Control and Prevention class B or C event.
Interestingly, regardless of HIV status, younger MSM had significantly lower BMD 
than older MSM, heterosexual men, and women.
CONCLUSIONS: The observed lower BMD in treated HIV-positive individuals was
largely explained by both lower body weight and more smoking. Having experienced 
symptomatic HIV disease, often associated with weight loss, was another risk
factor. The low BMD observed in younger MSM remains unexplained and needs further
study.

© The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the
Infectious Diseases Society of America. All rights reserved. For Permissions,
please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/infdis/jiu499 
PMID: 25180239  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
