

3133. Dan Med J. 2017 Mar;64(3). pii: B5333.

Peritonsillar abscess: clinical aspects of microbiology, risk factors, and the
association with parapharyngeal abscess.

Klug TE(1).

Author information: 
(1)tejsehlersklug@hotmail.com.

PTA is a collection of pus located between the tonsillar capsule and the
pharyngeal constrictor muscle. It is considered a complication of acute
tonsillitis and is the most prevalent deep neck infection (approximately 2000
cases annually in Denmark) and cause of acute admission to Danish ENT
departments. Teenagers and young adults are most commonly affected and males may 
predominate over females. However, no studies of age- and gender-stratified
incidence rates have previously been published. Furthermore, smoking may be
associated with increased risk of peritonsillar abscess (PTA) development,
although the magnitude of the association has not been estimated. Complications
are relatively rare. They include parapharyngeal abscess (PPA), upper airway
obstruction, Lemierre´s syndrome, necrotizing fasciitis, mediastinitis, erosion
of the internal carotid artery, brain abscess, and streptococcal toxic shock
syndrome. The treatment consists of abscess drainage and antimicrobial therapy.
There are three accepted methods of surgical intervension: needle aspiration,
incision and drainage (ID), and acute tonsillectomy (á chaud). Internationally,
there is a strong trend towards less invasive surgical approach to PTA treatment 
with avoidance of acute tonsillectomy, needle aspiration instead of ID, and in
some cases even antibiotic treatment without surgical drainage. The preferred
antibiotic regimen varies greatly between countries and centers. Group A
streptococcus (GAS) is the only established pathogen in PTA. However, GAS is only
recovered from approximately 20% of PTA patients. The pathogens in the remaining 
80% are unknown. Culturing of PTA pus aspirates often yields a polymicrobial
mixture of aerobes and anaerobes. As the tonsils of healthy individuals are
already heavily and diversely colonized, the identification of significant
pathogens is challenging. In addition, when studying PTA microbiology, one must
consider diagnostic precision, collection, handling, and transportation of
appropriate specimens, choice of methodology for detection and quantification of 
microorganisms, current or recent antibiotic treatment of patients, potential
shift in significant pathogens during the course of infection, and factors
associated with increased risk of PTA development.  The trend towards
de-escalated surgical intervention and increasing reliance on antibiotic
treatment, require studies defining the significant pathogens in PTA in order to 
determine optimal antibiotic regimens. Complications secondary to PTA may be
avoided or better controlled with improved knowledge concerning the significant
pathogens in PTA. Furthermore, identification of pathogens other than GAS, may
lead the way for earlier bacterial diagnosis and timely intervention before
abscess formation in sore throat patients. The identification and quantification 
of risk factors for PTA development constitutes another approach to reduce the
incidence of PTA. As clinicians, we noticed that FN was recovered from PTA
patients with increasing frequency and that patients infected with Fusobacterium 
necrophorum (FN) seemed to be more severely affected than patients infected with 
other bacteria. Furthermore, we occationally observed concomitant PPA in addition
to a PTA, which made us hypothesize that PPA and PTA is often closely related and
may share significant pathogens. Hence, our aims were: 1. To explore the
microbiology of PTA with a special attention to Fusobacterium necrophorum (FN).
2. To elucidate whether smoking, age, gender, and seasons are risk factors for
the development of PTA. 3. To characterize patients with PPA, explore the
relationship between PPA and PTA, identify the pathogens associated with PPA, and
review our management of PPA. In a retrospective study on all 847 PTA patients
admitted to the ENT department at Aarhus University Hospital (AUH) from 2001 to
2006, we found that FN was the most prevalent (23%) bacterial strain in pus
specimens. FN-positive patients displayed significantly higher infection markers 
(CRP and neutrophil counts) than patients infected with other bacteria (P = 0.01 
and P < 0.001, respectively). In a subsequent prospective and comparative study
on 36 PTA patients and 80 patients undergoing elective tonsillectomy (controls), 
we recovered FN from 58% of PTA aspirates. Furthermore, FN was detected
significantly more frequently in the tonsillar cores of PTA patients (56%)
compared to the tonsillar cores of the controls (24%) (P = 0.001). We also
analysed sera taken acutely and at least two weeks after surgery for the presence
of anti-FN antibodies. We found increasing levels (at least two-fold) of anti-FN 
antibodies in eight of 11 FN-positive (in the tonsillar cultures) PTA patients,
which was significantly more frequent compared to none of four FN-negative PTA
patients and nine of 47 electively tonsillectomized controls (P = 0.026 and P <
0.001, respectively). Blood cultures obtained during acute tonsillectomy mirrored
the bacterial findings in the tonsillar specimens with 22% of patients having
bacteremia with FN. However, bacteremia during elective tonsillectomy was at
least as prevalent as bacteremia during quinsy tonsillectomy, which challenges
the distinction made by the European Society of Cardiology between quinsy and
elective tonsillectomy, namely that antibiotic prophylaxis is only recommended to
patients undergoing procedures to treat an established infection (i.e. PTA).
Using PCR analysis for the presence of herpes simplex 1 and 2, adenovirus,
influenza A and B, Epstein-Barr virus (EBV), and respiratory syncytial virus A
and B, we explored a possible role of viruses in PTA. However, our results did
not indicate that any of these viruses are involved in the development of PTA.
Privious studies have documented an association between EBV and PTA in
approximately 4% of PTA cases. In addition to the involvement of GAS, the
following findings suggest a pathogenic role for FN in PTA: 1. Repeated high
isolation rates of FN in PTA pus aspirates. 2. Higher isolation rates in PTA
patients compared to electively tonsillectomised controls. 3. Development of
anti-FN antibodies in FN-positive patients with PTA. 4. Significantly higher
inflammatory markers in FN-positive patients compared to PTA patients infected
with other bacteria. We studied the smoking habits among the same 847 PTA
patients admitted to the ENT department, AUH from 2001 to 2006. We found that
smoking was associated with increased risk of PTA for both genders and across all
age groups. The increased risk of PTA among smokers was not related to specific
bacteria. Conclusions on causality cannot be drawn from this retrospective study,
but the pathophysiology behind the increased risk of PTA in smokers may be
related to, previously shown, alterations in the tonsillar, bacterial flora or
the local and systemical inflammatory and immunological milieu. Studying all
1,620 patients with PTA in Aarhus County from 2001 to 2006 and using population
data for Aarhus County for the same six years, age- and gender-stratified mean
annual incidence rates of PTA were calculated. The incidence of PTA was highly
related to age and gender. The seasonal variation of PTA was insignificant.
However, the microbiology of PTA fluctuated with seasons: GAS-positive PTA cases 
were significantly more prevalent in the winter and spring compared to the
summer, while FN-positive PTA patients exhibited a more even distribution over
the year, but with a trend towards higher prevalence in the summer than in the
winter. In a series of 63 patients with PPA, we found that 33 (52%) patients had 
concomitant PTA. This association between PPA and PTA was much higher than
previously documented. We therefore suggest that combined tonsillectomy and
intrapharyngeal incision in cases where PTA is present or suspected. The results 
of our routine cultures could not support a frequent role of FN in PPA. Based on 
our findings suggesting that FN is a frequent pathogen in PTA, we recommend
clindamycin instead of a macrolide in penicillin-allergic patients with PTA.
Furthermore, cultures made from PTA aspirates should include a selective FN-agar 
plate in order to identify growth of this bacterium. Recent studies of sore
throat patients document an association between recovery of FN and acute
tonsillitis. Studying the bacterial flora of both tonsils in study II, we found
almost perfect concordance between the bacterial findings of the tonsillar core
at the side of the abscess and contralaterally. This finding suggests that FN is 
not a subsequent overgrowth phenomenon after abscess development, but that FN can
act as pathogen in severe acute tonsillitis. Future studies of patients with
FN-positive acute tonsillitis focusing on the optimal methods (clinical
characteristics, culture, polymerase chain reaction, or other) for diagnosis and 
whether antibiotics (and which) can reduce symptoms and avoid complications are
warranted. Until further studies are undertaken, we recommend clinicians to have 
increased focus on acute tonsillitis patients aged 15-24 years with regards to
symptoms and findings suggestive of incipient peritonsillar involvement. We have 
conducted a number of studies with novel findings: 1. FN is a significant and
prevalent pathogen in PTA. 2. Bacteremia during abscess tonsillectomy is no more 
prevalent than during elective tonsillectomy. 3. The development of anti-FN
antibodies in FN-positive PTA patients. We have used novel approaches as
principles to suggest pathogenic significance of candidate microorganisms: 1.
Comparative microbiology between PTA patients and "normal tonsils". 2.
Measurements indicating larger inflammatory response compared to clinically
equivalent infection.


PMID: 28260599  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
