

3135. Oncogene. 2015 Apr 30;34(18):2347-59. doi: 10.1038/onc.2014.169. Epub 2014 Jun
16.

Cellular senescence checkpoint function determines differential Notch1-dependent 
oncogenic and tumor-suppressor activities.

Kagawa S(1), Natsuizaka M(2), Whelan KA(1), Facompre N(3), Naganuma S(4), Ohashi 
S(5), Kinugasa H(6), Egloff AM(7), Basu D(3), Gimotty PA(8), Klein-Szanto AJ(9), 
Bass AJ(10), Wong KK(10), Diehl JA(11), Rustgi AK(12), Nakagawa H(1).

Author information: 
(1)1] Gastroenterology Division, Department of Medicine, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA [2] Abramson Cancer Center, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(2)1] Gastroenterology Division, Department of Medicine, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA [2] Abramson Cancer Center, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA [3] Department of Gastroenterology and
Hepatology, Hokkaido University, Sapporo, Japan.
(3)1] Departments of Otorhinolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA [2] Philadelphia VA Medical Center,
Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(4)1] Gastroenterology Division, Department of Medicine, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA [2] Abramson Cancer Center, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA [3] Department of Pathology, Kochi University
Medical School, Kochi, Japan.
(5)1] Gastroenterology Division, Department of Medicine, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA [2] Abramson Cancer Center, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA [3] Department of Therapeutic Oncology, Kyoto
University Graduate School of Medicine, Kyoto, Japan.
(6)1] Gastroenterology Division, Department of Medicine, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA [2] Abramson Cancer Center, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA [3] Department of Gastroenterology and
Hepatology, Okayama University Graduate School of Medicine, Dentistry, and
Pharmaceutical Sciences, Okayama, Japan.
(7)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, University of Pittsburgh
School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, PA, USA.
(8)1] Abramson Cancer Center, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA
[2] Division of Biostatistics, Center for Clinical Epidemiology and
Biostatistics, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(9)Department of Pathology, Fox Chase Cancer Center, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(10)1] Department of Medicine, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA [2]
Division of Cellular and Molecular Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute,
Boston, MA, USA.
(11)1] Abramson Cancer Center, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA 
[2] Department of Cancer Biology, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA,
USA.
(12)1] Gastroenterology Division, Department of Medicine, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA [2] Abramson Cancer Center, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA [3] Department of Genetics, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA.

Notch activity regulates tumor biology in a context-dependent and complex manner.
Notch may act as an oncogene or a tumor-suppressor gene even within the same
tumor type. Recently, Notch signaling has been implicated in cellular senescence.
Yet, it remains unclear as to how cellular senescence checkpoint functions may
interact with Notch-mediated oncogenic and tumor-suppressor activities. Herein,
we used genetically engineered human esophageal keratinocytes and esophageal
squamous cell carcinoma cells to delineate the functional consequences of Notch
activation and inhibition along with pharmacological intervention and RNA
interference experiments. When expressed in a tetracycline-inducible manner, the 
ectopically expressed activated form of Notch1 (ICN1) displayed oncogene-like
characteristics inducing cellular senescence corroborated by the induction of
G0/G1 cell-cycle arrest, Rb dephosphorylation, flat and enlarged cell morphology 
and senescence-associated β-galactosidase activity. Notch-induced senescence
involves canonical CSL/RBPJ-dependent transcriptional activity and the
p16(INK4A)-Rb pathway. Loss of p16(INK4A) or the presence of human papilloma
virus (HPV) E6/E7 oncogene products not only prevented ICN1 from inducing
senescence but permitted ICN1 to facilitate anchorage-independent colony
formation and xenograft tumor growth with increased cell proliferation and
reduced squamous-cell differentiation. Moreover, Notch1 appears to mediate
replicative senescence as well as transforming growth factor-β-induced cellular
senescence in non-transformed cells and that HPV E6/E7 targets Notch1 for
inactivation to prevent senescence, revealing a tumor-suppressor attribute of
endogenous Notch1. In aggregate, cellular senescence checkpoint functions may
influence dichotomous Notch activities in the neoplastic context.

DOI: 10.1038/onc.2014.169 
PMCID: PMC4268095
PMID: 24931169  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
