

3137. Curr Treat Options Oncol. 2013 Dec;14(4):475-91. doi: 10.1007/s11864-013-0261-5.

Current treatment options for local residual nasopharyngeal carcinoma.

Stoker SD(1), van Diessen JN, de Boer JP, Karakullukcu B, Leemans CR, Tan IB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Head and Neck Surgery and Oncology, The Netherlands Cancer
Institute, Plesmanlaan 121, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, s.stoker@nki.nl.

OPINION STATEMENT: Local residual disease occurs in 7-13 % after primary
treatment for nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC). To prevent tumor progression and/or
distant metastasis, treatment is indicated. Biopsy is the "gold standard" for
diagnosing residual disease. Because late histological regression frequently is
seen after primary treatment for NPC, biopsy should be performed when imaging or 
endoscopy is suspicious at 10 weeks. Different modalities can be used in the
treatment of local residual disease. Interestingly, the treatment of residual
disease has better outcomes than treatment of recurrent disease. For early-stage 
disease (rT1-2), treatment results and survival rates are very good and
comparable to patients who had a complete response after the first treatment.
Surgery (endoscopic or open), brachytherapy (interstitial or intracavitary),
external or stereotactic beam radiotherapy, or photodynamic therapy all have very
good and comparable response rates. Choice should depend on the extension of
disease, feasibility of the treatment, and doctor's and patient's preferences and
experience, as well as the risks of the adverse events. For the more extended
tumors, choice of treatment is more difficult, because complete response rates
are poorer and severe side effects are not uncommon. The results of external beam
reirradiation and stereotactic radiotherapy are better than brachytherapy for
T3-4 tumors. Photodynamic therapy resulted in good palliative responses in a few 
patients with extensive disease. Also, chemotherapeutics or the Epstein-Barr
virus targeted therapies can be used when curative intent treatment is not
feasible anymore. However, their advantage in isolated local failure has not been
well described yet. Because residual disease often is a problem in countries with
a high incidence of NPC and limited radiotherapeutic and surgical facilities, it 
should be understood that most of the above mentioned therapeutic modalities
(radiotherapy and surgery) will not be readily available. More research with
controlled, randomized trials are needed to find realistic treatment options for 
residual disease.

DOI: 10.1007/s11864-013-0261-5 
PMCID: PMC3841576
PMID: 24243165  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
