

3147. JCI Insight. 2016 Oct 6;1(16):e88755.

Subtyping sub-Saharan esophageal squamous cell carcinoma by comprehensive
molecular analysis.

Liu W(1), Snell JM(2), Jeck WR(3), Hoadley KA(3), Wilkerson MD(3), Parker JS(3), 
Patel N(4), Mlombe YB(5), Mulima G(6), Liomba NG(7), Wolf LL(8), Shores CG(9),
Gopal S(10), Sharpless NE(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics,; Department of Medicine,; The Lineberger Comprehensive
Cancer Center.
(2)The Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center,; Program in Bioinformatics and
Computational Biology,; Program in Molecular and Cellular Biophysics.
(3)Department of Genetics,; The Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center.
(4)The Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center,; Department of Pathology and
Laboratory Medicine, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, North Carolina,
USA.
(5)Department of Medicine, University of Malawi College of Medicine, Blantyre,
Malawi.
(6)Department of Surgery, Kamuzu Central Hospital, Lilongwe, Malawi.
(7)UNC Project-Malawi, Lilongwe, Malawi.
(8)UNC Project-Malawi, Lilongwe, Malawi.; Department of Surgery, Brigham and
Women's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
(9)The Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center,; Department of Otolaryngology/Head
and Neck Surgery.
(10)Department of Medicine,; The Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center,;
Department of Medicine, University of Malawi College of Medicine, Blantyre,
Malawi.; UNC Project-Malawi, Lilongwe, Malawi.; Gillings School of Global Public 
Health, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, North Carolina, USA.

Esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC) is endemic in regions of sub-Saharan
Africa (SSA), where it is the third most common cancer. Here, we describe
whole-exome tumor/normal sequencing and RNA transcriptomic analysis of 59
patients with ESCC in Malawi. We observed similar genetic aberrations as reported
in Asian and North American cohorts, including mutations of TP53, CDKN2A, NFE2L2,
CHEK2, NOTCH1, FAT1, and FBXW7. Analyses for nonhuman sequences did not reveal
evidence for infection with HPV or other occult pathogens. Mutational signature
analysis revealed common signatures associated with aging, cytidine deaminase
activity (APOBEC), and a third signature of unknown origin, but signatures of
inhaled tobacco use, aflatoxin and mismatch repair were notably absent. Based on 
RNA expression analysis, ESCC could be divided into 3 distinct subtypes, which
were distinguished by their expression of cell cycle and neural transcripts. This
study demonstrates discrete subtypes of ESCC in SSA, and suggests that the
endemic nature of this disease reflects exposure to a carcinogen other than
tobacco and oncogenic viruses.

DOI: 10.1172/jci.insight.88755 
PMCID: PMC5053149
PMID: 27734031  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
