

3153. Zhonghua Bing Li Xue Za Zhi. 2011 Feb;40(2):89-93.

[Thyroid carcinoma showing thymus-like differentiation: a clinicopathologic study
of 8 cases].

[Article in Chinese]

Liu X(1), Hadeti B, Zhang W, Wang J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, the First Affiliated Hospital of Xinjiang Medical
University, Urumqi 830054, China.

OBJECTIVE: To study the clinicopathologic features, immunophenotypes and
differential diagnosis of thyroid carcinoma showing thymus-like differentiation
(CASTLE).
METHODS: The clinical and pathologic features of 8 cases of CASTLE were reviewed.
Immunohistochemical study was performed using a panel of antibodies. In-situ
hybridization for Epstein-Barr virus-encoded RNA (EBER) was also carried out.
RESULTS: There were altogether 4 males and 4 females. The age of the patients
ranged from 25 to 57 years (mean = 48.8 years). All of them presented with
painless mass at the anterior neck. Two patients also complained of hoarseness of
voice. On CT scan, the tumor had a low density with contrast enhancement. Seven
cases were located in the mid to lower pole and the remaining one in the upper
pole of thyroid gland. Four cases were relatively circumscribed. The other 4
cases showed evidence of extrathyroidal invasion. Grossly, the tumor had a
nodular or lobulated appearance and was gray-white in color, with a mean diameter
of 4.3 cm. Microscopically, the tumor was infiltrative and consisted of islands, 
nests or lobules of epithelial cells separated by thick fibrous septa. The
fibrous stroma showed various degree of lymphoplasmacytic infiltration, resulting
in a prominent lymphoepithelioma-like pattern in 3 cases. Two cases showed
squamoid differentiation, mimicking thymic Hassall corpuscles.
Immunohistochemically, the tumor was consistently positive for cytokeratins, CD5,
bcl-2, p63 and CD117. CEA was variably expressed. The staining for thyroglobin
and TTF1 was negative. There was no labeling for EBER in all the cases. Two
patients experienced local recurrence at 22 months and 12 years after surgery,
respectively. They were treated with re-resection. All patients remained well on 
follow up. The duration of follow up ranged from 4 to 55 months.
CONCLUSIONS: CASTLE is a low-grade thyroid carcinoma with the morphologic
features and immunophenotypes overlapping with those of thymic carcinoma.
Awareness of this rare entity is important to both the pathologists and
clinicians.


PMID: 21426803  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
