

3167. Cell Death Dis. 2014 Nov 6;5:e1507. doi: 10.1038/cddis.2014.451.

Tumor-induced senescent T cells promote the secretion of pro-inflammatory
cytokines and angiogenic factors by human monocytes/macrophages through a
mechanism that involves Tim-3 and CD40L.

Ramello MC(1), Tosello Boari J(1), Canale FP(1), Mena HA(2), Negrotto S(2),
Gastman B(3), Gruppi A(1), Acosta Rodríguez EV(1), Montes CL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Centro de Investigaciones en Bioquímica Clínica e Inmunología
(CIBICI-CONICET), Departamento de Bioquímica Clínica, Facultad de Ciencias
Químicas, Universidad Nacional de Córdoba, Haya de la Torre y Medina Allende,
Ciudad Universitaria, Córdoba, Argentina.
(2)Laboratorio de Trombosis Experimental, Instituto de Medicina Experimental
(IMEX), Academia Nacional de Medicina-CONICET, Buenos Aires, Argentina.
(3)Cleveland Clinic, Department of Immunology and Plastic Surgery, Head and Neck 
and Taussig Institutes, Cleveland, OH, USA.

Solid tumors are infiltrated by immune cells where macrophages and senescent T
cells are highly represented. Within the tumor microenvironment, a cross-talk
between the infiltrating cells may occur conditioning the characteristic of the
in situ immune response. Our previous work showed that tumors induce senescence
of T cells, which are powerful suppressors of lympho-proliferation. In this
study, we report that Tumor-Induced Senescent (TIS)-T cells may also modulate
monocyte activation. To gain insight into this interaction, CD4+ or CD8+TIS-T or 
control-T cells were co-incubated with autologous monocytes under inflammatory
conditions. After co-culture with CD4+ or CD8+TIS-T cells, CD14+
monocytes/macrophages (Mo/Ma) exhibit a higher expression of CD16+ cells and a
reduced expression of CD206. These Mo/Ma produce nitric oxide and reactive oxygen
species; however, TIS-T cells do not modify phagocyte capacity of Mo/Ma. TIS-T
modulated-Mo/Ma show a higher production of pro-inflammatory cytokines (TNF,
IL-1β and IL-6) and angiogenic factors (MMP-9, VEGF-A and IL-8) and a lower IL-10
and IP-10 secretion than monocytes co-cultured with controls. The mediator(s)
present in the supernatant of TIS-T cell/monocyte-macrophage co-cultures
promote(s) tubulogenesis and tumor-cell survival. Monocyte-modulation induced by 
TIS-T cells requires cell-to-cell contact. Although CD4+ shows different behavior
from CD8+TIS-T cells, blocking mAbs against T-cell immunoglobulin and mucin
protein 3 and CD40 ligand reduce pro-inflammatory cytokines and angiogenic
factors production, indicating that these molecules are involved in
monocyte/macrophage modulation by TIS-T cells. Our results revealed a novel role 
for TIS-T cells in human monocyte/macrophage modulation, which may have
deleterious consequences for tumor progression. This modulation should be
considered to best tailor the immunotherapy against cancer.

DOI: 10.1038/cddis.2014.451 
PMCID: PMC4260722
PMID: 25375372  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
