

3177. J Bone Miner Res. 2016 Sep;31(9):1774-82. doi: 10.1002/jbmr.2842. Epub 2016 May
9.

Idiopathic Acquired Osteosclerosis in a Middle-Aged Woman With Systemic Lupus
Erythematosus.

Guañabens N(1), Mumm S(2)(3), Gifre L(1), Ruiz-Gaspà S(1), Demertzis JL(4),
Stolina M(5), Novack DV(2)(6), Whyte MP(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Metabolic Bone Diseases Unit, Department of Rheumatology, Hospital Clinic,
CIBERehd, IDIBAPS, University of Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.
(2)Division of Bone and Mineral Diseases, Department of Internal Medicine,
Washington University School of Medicine at Barnes-Jewish Hospital, St. Louis,
MO, USA.
(3)Center for Metabolic Bone Disease and Molecular Research, Shriners Hospital
for Children, St. Louis, MO, USA.
(4)Musculoskeletal Disease Section, Mallinckrodt Institute of Radiology at
Barnes-Jewish Hospital, St. Louis, MO, USA.
(5)Department of Metabolic Disorders, Amgen Inc., Thousand Oaks, CA, USA.
(6)Department of Pathology, Washington University School of Medicine at
Barnes-Jewish Hospital, St. Louis, MO, USA.

Widely distributed osteosclerosis is an unusual radiographic finding with
multiple causes. A 42-year-old premenopausal Spanish woman gradually acquired
dense bone diffusely affecting her axial skeleton and focally affecting her
proximal long bones. Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) diagnosed in adolescence 
had been well controlled. She had not fractured or received antiresorptive
therapy, and she was hepatitis C virus antibody negative. Family members had low 
bone mass. Lumbar spine bone mineral density (BMD) measured by dual-photon
absorptiometry (DPA) at age 17 years, while receiving glucocorticoids, was 79%
the average value of age-matched controls. From ages 30 to 37 years, dual-energy 
X-ray absorptiometry (DXA) BMD Z-scores steadily increased in her lumbar spine
from +3.8 to +7.9, and in her femoral neck from -1.4 to -0.7. Serum calcium and
phosphorus levels were consistently normal, 25-hydroxyvitamin D (25OHD)
<20 ng/mL, and parathyroid hormone (PTH) sometimes slightly increased. Her
reduced estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) was 38 to 55 mL/min.
Hypocalciuria likely reflected positive mineral balance. During increasing BMD,
turnover markers (serum bone-specific alkaline phosphatase [ALP], procollagen
type 1 N propeptide [P1NP], osteocalcin [OCN], and carboxy-terminal cross-linking
telopeptide of type 1 collagen [CTx], and urinary amino-terminal cross-linking
telopeptide of type 1 collagen [NTx and CTx]) were 1.6- to 2.8-fold above the
reference limits. Those of bone formation seemed increased more than those of
resorption. FGF-23 was slightly elevated, perhaps from kidney disease. Serum
osteoprotegerin (OPG) and TGFβ1 levels were normal, but sclerostin (SOST) and
receptor activator of nuclear factor kappa-B ligand (RANKL) were elevated. Serum 
multiplex biomarker profiling confirmed a high level of SOST and RANKL, whereas
Dickkopf-1 (DKK-1) seemed low. Matrix metalloproteinases-3 (MMP-3) and -7 (MMP-7)
were elevated. Iliac crest biopsy revealed tetracycline labels, no distinction
between thick trabeculae and cortical bone, absence of peritrabecular fibrosis,
few osteoclasts, and no mastocytosis. Then, for the past 3 years, BMD Z-scores
steadily decreased. Skeletal fluorosis, mastocytosis, myelofibrosis, hepatitis
C-associated osteosclerosis, multiple myeloma, and aberrant phosphate homeostasis
did not explain her osteosclerosis. Mutation analysis of the LRP5, LRP4, SOST,
and osteopetrosis genes was negative. Microarray showed no notable copy number
variation. Perhaps her osteosclerosis reflected an interval of
autoimmune-mediated resistance to SOST and/or RANKL. © 2016 American Society for 
Bone and Mineral Research.

© 2016 American Society for Bone and Mineral Research.

DOI: 10.1002/jbmr.2842 
PMCID: PMC5010446
PMID: 27005479  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
