

3183. Pediatr Pulmonol. 2016 Feb;51(2):115-32. doi: 10.1002/ppul.23304. Epub 2015 Sep
29.

Diagnosis, monitoring, and treatment of primary ciliary dyskinesia: PCD
foundation consensus recommendations based on state of the art review.

Shapiro AJ(1), Zariwala MA(2), Ferkol T(3), Davis SD(4), Sagel SD(5), Dell SD(6),
Rosenfeld M(7), Olivier KN(8), Milla C(9), Daniel SJ(10), Kimple AJ(11), Manion
M(12), Knowles MR(13), Leigh MW(14); Genetic Disorders of Mucociliary Clearance
Consortium.

Collaborators: Epperson L, Quante J, Kopecky C, Mann S, Parker D, Zirbes J,
Johnson R, Mikki M, Chang H, Helfrich R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Montreal Children's Hospital, McGill University,
Quebec, Canada.
(2)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of North Carolina 
School of Medicine, Marsico Lung Institute, Chapel Hill, North Carolina.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis,
Missouri.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, Riley Hospital for Children, Indiana University,
Indianapolis, Indiana.
(5)Department of Pediatrics, Children's Hospital Colorado and University of
Colorado School of Medicine, Aurora, Colorado.
(6)Department of Pediatrics, The Hospital for Sick Children and University of
Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(7)Department of Pediatrics, Seattle Children's Hospital and University of
Washington, Seattle, Washington.
(8)National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute, Bethesda, Maryland.
(9)Department of Pediatrics, Stanford University, Palo Alto, California.
(10)Department of Otolaryngology, Montreal Children's Hospital, McGill
University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.
(11)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, University of North
Carolina School of Medicine, Chapel Hill, North Carolina.
(12)The PCD Foundation-President, Minneapolis, Minnesota.
(13)Department of Medicine, University of North Carolina, Marsico Lung Institute,
Chapel Hill, North Carolina.
(14)Department of Pediatrics, University of North Carolina, Marsico Lung
Institute, Chapel Hill, North Carolina.

Primary ciliary dyskinesia (PCD) is a genetically heterogeneous, rare lung
disease resulting in chronic oto-sino-pulmonary disease in both children and
adults. Many physicians incorrectly diagnose PCD or eliminate PCD from their
differential diagnosis due to inexperience with diagnostic testing methods. Thus 
far, all therapies used for PCD are unproven through large clinical trials. This 
review article outlines consensus recommendations from PCD physicians in North
America who have been engaged in a PCD centered research consortium for the last 
10 years. These recommendations have been adopted by the governing board of the
PCD Foundation to provide guidance for PCD clinical centers for diagnostic
testing, monitoring, and appropriate short and long-term therapeutics in PCD
patients.

© 2015 The Authors. Pediatric Pulmonology Published by Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ppul.23304 
PMCID: PMC4912005
PMID: 26418604  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
