

330. J Clin Virol. 2015 Oct;71:34-9. doi: 10.1016/j.jcv.2015.07.307. Epub 2015 Jul 31.

Human papillomavirus DNA in pharyngeal scrapes as a marker of HPV-related
squamous cell cancer of the oropharynx.

Snietura M(1), Rutkowski T(2), Piglowski W(3), Hajduk A(2), Wygoda A(2),
Skladowski K(2), Lange D(3).

Author information: 
(1)Tumor Pathology Department, Maria Sklodowska-Curie Memorial Cancer Center and 
Institute of Oncology, Gliwice Branch, Poland. Electronic address:
mirek@snietura.net.
(2)Department of Radiation Oncology, Maria Sklodowska-Curie Memorial Cancer
Center and Institute of Oncology, Gliwice Branch, Poland.
(3)Tumor Pathology Department, Maria Sklodowska-Curie Memorial Cancer Center and 
Institute of Oncology, Gliwice Branch, Poland.

BACKGROUND: Recent studies have indicated that human papillomavirus is an
etiologic agent for a subset of head and neck cancers associated with better
prognosis, therefore, prompt confirmation of such etiology seems to be crucial
for choosing the optimal therapeutic option. Standard HPV diagnosis is currently 
based on histopathological material. In the present study, the novel diagnostic
method based on pharyngeal brush biopsy is proposed.
OBJECTIVES: The aim of this study was to evaluate the usefulness of the Real-Time
PCR-based (RT-PCR) test in detecting HPV-related cancer of the oropharynx using
superficial scraps taken from the oropharyngeal region.
STUDY DESIGN: Ninety patients with head and neck squamous cell cancer were
enrolled in the study. The presence of HPV DNA in pharyngeal superficial scrapes 
assessed by RT-PCR was compared to the HPV status in the tumor tissue samples
determined by a combined RT-PCR/P16(INK4A) expression algorithm. Analytical
sensitivity and specificity were calculated and the clinical outcome was analyzed
in correlation to the HPV status.
RESULTS: HR-HPV DNA in pharyngeal swabs was revealed in 25 cases (28.4%) and
simultaneously confirmed in all corresponding tissue samples. Sensitivity and
specificity of the viral status assessment in the brush biopsies in respect to
the RT-PCR/P16(INK4A) 20 were 100% and 96.2%, respectively. HR-HPV positive
status was associated with an excellent clinical outcome and reduced hazard ratio
of recurrence and disease-related death.
CONCLUSIONS: The proposed novel method of HPV status assessment using RT-PCR and 
superficial scraps appeared to be highly sensitive, specific, and useful in
predicting the clinical outcome.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jcv.2015.07.307 
PMID: 26370312  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
