

335. Int J Dermatol. 2016 Jul;55(7):745-50. doi: 10.1111/ijd.12982. Epub 2015 Oct 22.

Human papillomavirus type 2 associated with pyogenic granuloma in patients
without clinical evidence of warts.

Vázquez-Martínez OT(1), González-Betancourt A(2), Barboza-Cerda MC(3)(4),
González-González SE(1), Lugo-Trampe Á(5), Welsh O(1), Rojas-Martínez A(4)(6),
Martínez-Rodríguez HG(6), Ocampo-Candiani J(1), Ortiz-López R(4)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Servicio de Dermatología, Hospital Universitario "Dr. José E. González",
Universidad Autónoma de Nuevo León, Monterrey, Nuevo León, Mexico.
(2)Laboratorio Integrativo en Biología Molecular y Celular. Centro de
Investigaciones Odontológicas, Facultad de Odontología, Universidad de los Andes,
Mérida, Venezuela.
(3)Servicio de Anatomía Patológica y Citopatología, Hospital Universitario "José 
Eleuterio González", Universidad Autónoma de Nuevo León, Monterrey, Mexico.
(4)Centro de Investigación y Desarrollo en Ciencias de la Salud (CIDICS),
Universidad Autónoma de Nuevo León, Monterrey, Nuevo León, Mexico.
(5)Centro Mesoamericano de Estudios en Salud Pública y Desastres (CEMESAD),
Universidad Autónoma de Chiapas (UNACH), Tapachula, Chiapas, Mexico.
(6)Laboratorio de Genética Molecular, Departamento de Bioquímica y Medicina
Molecular, Facultad de Medicina, Universidad Autónoma de Nuevo León, Monterrey,
Nuevo León, Mexico.

BACKGROUND: Pyogenic granuloma is a non-neoplastic lesion that frequently occurs 
in the skin and mucous membranes of children and pregnant women. The anatomical
sites of pyogenic granulomas overlap with those of wart infections caused by the 
human papillomavirus (HPV).
OBJECTIVE: This study assessed the presence of HPV DNA in pyogenic granuloma
samples by polymerase chain reaction.
METHODS: Eighteen pyogenic granuloma biopsies from patients without a clinical
history or evidence of verruca in the studied area were tested for the presence
of the HPV genome. The presence of HPV DNA was screened by three independent
polymerase chain reaction reactions using standard consensus primer sets targeted
to the L1 or E1 consensus regions of HPV genome. The HPV DNA-positive samples
were genotyped using methodologies enabling the identification of up to 30 HPVs, 
including oncogenic, nononcogenic, and cutaneous viral types.
RESULTS: The HPV DNA was detected in 44.4% (eight of 18) of the samples, with
HPV-2 being the only type in the eight HPV DNA-positive samples. Contamination
with HPV-2 sequences throughout the entire process was reliably eliminated.
CONCLUSION: This report is the first to suggest an association between HPV-2 and 
pyogenic granuloma. This relationship is similar to that observed between HPV-2
and nongenital warts.

© 2015 The International Society of Dermatology.

DOI: 10.1111/ijd.12982 
PMID: 26492599  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
