

336. J Clin Virol. 2016 Feb;75:37-41. doi: 10.1016/j.jcv.2016.01.002. Epub 2016 Jan 6.

Loop mediated isothermal amplification (LAMP) for the detection and subtyping of 
human papillomaviruses (HPV) in oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma (OPSCC).

Livingstone DM(1), Rohatensky M(2), Mintchev P(3), Nakoneshny SC(4), Demetrick
DJ(5), van Marle G(3), Dort JC(6).

Author information: 
(1)Section of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Department of Surgery,
Cumming School of Medicine, University of Calgary, Calgary, Alberta, Canada.
Electronic address: devonlivingstone@gmail.com.
(2)Undergraduate Medical Education, Faculty of Medicine & Dentistry, University
of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada.
(3)Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Infectious Diseases, Cumming School
of Medicine, University of Calgary, Calgary, Alberta, Canada.
(4)Ohlson Research Initiative, Southern Alberta Cancer Research Institute,
Cumming School of Medicine, University of Calgary, Calgary, Alberta, Canada.
(5)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Cumming School of Medicine,
University of Calgary and Calgary Laboratory Services, Calgary, Alberta, Canada.
(6)Section of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Department of Surgery,
Cumming School of Medicine, University of Calgary, Calgary, Alberta, Canada;
Ohlson Research Initiative, Southern Alberta Cancer Research Institute, Cumming
School of Medicine, University of Calgary, Calgary, Alberta, Canada.

BACKGROUND: Human papillomavirus (HPV)-related oropharyngeal squamous cell
carcinoma (OPSCC) is a growing problem that presents a significant challenge to
Otolaryngologist-Head and Neck Surgeons. Knowledge of HPV status yields critical 
prognostic information, with potential for treatment selection based on tumour
HPV status. The current gold standard of diagnosis, PCR, is expensive, demanding 
and time consuming. Alternatives such as p16 immunohistochemistry are subjective 
and potentially inaccurate. Loop-mediated isothermal amplification (LAMP) is a
rapid, robust and inexpensive molecular diagnostic technique.
OBJECTIVES: Our aim was to verify LAMP as a potential bedside diagnostic assay
for subtyping of HPV in OPSCC.
STUDY DESIGN: DNA from 72 formalin-fixed paraffin embedded (FFPE) OPSCC patient
samples was tested. PCR and LAMP were then performed to specifically identify HPV
16, 18, 31, 33 and 35.
RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS: For these high-risk subtypes, LAMP had an overall
sensitivity of 99.4% and specificity of 93.2% relative to PCR. LAMP is a
promising technology that can accurately diagnose high-risk HPV infection.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jcv.2016.01.002 
PMID: 26780110  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
