

350. Hepatogastroenterology. 2014 May;61(131):599-605.

Phase I Dose-escalation Clinical Trial of HF10 Oncolytic Herpes Virus in 17
Japanese Patients with Advanced Cancer.

Kasuya H, Kodera Y, Nakao A, Yamamura K, Gewen T, Zhiwen W, Hotta Y, Yamada S,
Fujii T, Fukuda S, Tsurumaru N, Kuwahara T, Kikumori T, Koide Y, Fujimoto Y,
Nakashima T, Hirooka Y, Shiku H, Tanaka M, Takesako K, Kondo T, Aleksic B,
Kawashima H, Goto H, Nishiyama Y.

Oncolytic virus therapy is a promising new therapeutic method, one of an eagerly 
anticipated class of biological therapies against cancer. There are many
different classes of oncolytic virus. One of these, herpes oncolytic virus, is
strongly oncolytic and has a large DNA genome as 150k bp. HF10 is a spontaneous
mutant of herpes simplex virus -1 (HSV-1) that replicates within tumors and
destroys cancers without damaging normal tissue and organs. Clinical trials of
HF10 are underway in Japan and the United States. The first pilot study of HF10
was initiated in Japan in 2003. This study examined the safety and efficacy of
HF10 in the treatment of breast cancer and head and neck cancers; the trial also 
included careful dose escalation studies. In 2005, a clinical trial using HF10 to
treat pancreatic cancer was initiated. screened In this Japanese study, 17
patients received HF10 in their tumor sites. A clinical trial in the United
States is also ongoing to evaluate safety, tolerability and evidence of antitumor
activity in patients with refractory superficial solid tumors. Here, we report
the evaluation of the 17 patients treated in Japan. Among the patients, 6 had
recurrent breast cancer, 3 had recurrent head and neck cancer, and 8 had
non-resectable pancreatic cancer. No severe adverse side effects have been
observed, and some therapeutic potential has been reported based on pathological 
findings, tumor markers, and diagnostic radiography. Those results should
encourage further clinical trials of HF10 around the world.


PMID: 26176043  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
