

361. Zhonghua Wei Zhong Bing Ji Jiu Yi Xue. 2016 Feb;28(2):106-9. doi:
10.3760/cma.j.issn.2095-4352.2016.02.005.

[Experience of integrated traditional Chinese and Western medicine in first case 
of imported Zika virus disease in China].

[Article in Chinese]

Deng Y(1), Zeng L, Bao W, Xu P, Zhong G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infectious Disease, Ganxian People's Hospital, Ganxian 341100,
Jiangxi, China. Corresponding author: Zhong Gongrong, Email: zgr1965@sina.com.

OBJECTIVE: Zika virus disease is an acute infectious disease caused by Zika virus
transmitted through Aedes mosquitoes. To explore the therapeutic effect of
integrated traditional Chinese and Western Medicine for Zika virus disease, the
treatment process of the first imported case in China was reviewed.
METHODS: The first imported Zika virus disease in China was admitted to Ganxian
People's Hospital in Jiangxi Province on February 6th, 2016, and the patient
received isolation treatment for 9 days and cured later. The effect of antiviral 
treatments including Xiyanping injection was evaluated based on clinical
diagnosis and treatment process of the patient.
RESULTS: A 34-year old male patient was admitted with chief complaint of fever
for 9 days, orbital pain and itching rash for 4 days on February 6th, 2016. (1)
Epidemiological characteristics: the patient was bitted by mosquitoes during his 
business trip in Venezuela since January 1st, where Zika virus disease was
spreading. On January 20th he had dizziness without fever, and the symptom
disappeared after taking medicines without details. Paroxysmal dizziness, chills 
and mild fever without myalgia was experienced on January 28th. On February 3rd
small red rash appeared in the neck, spreading to anterior part of chest, limbs
and trunk, and the fever, fatigue, nausea was continued, and a new symptom of
paroxysmal pain in back of ears and orbits appeared, during which he had not go
to hospital. The symptoms relieved on February 4th. He returned to Ganxian County
on February 5th, he had yellow stool 3 times with normal temperature, without
abdominal pain, and red rash still appeared in the neck. He went to Ganxian
People's Hospital on February 6th, 2016. (2) Clinical manifestation: the vital
signs showed a temperature of 36.8?centigrade, a pulse rate of 80 bpm, a
respiratory rate of 20 bpm, and a blood pressure of 110/70 mmHg (1 mmHg = 0.133
kPa). It was showed by physical examination that red rash appeared in the neck,
and no superficial enlarged lymph nodes were found. Bilateral conjunctival
congestion was obvious, physiological reflex existed and pathological reflex was 
not found. (3) Auxiliary lab test and examination: no abnormal finding were
revealed throughout examination and laboratory tests, including routine blood
test, liver function, renal function, serum myocardial enzyme, electrolyte, blood
sugar, C-reactive protein (CRP), troponin I (TnI), and procalcitonin (PCT),
except slight prolongation in activated partial thromboplastin time (APTT, 38.6
s) on February 6th; and slightly dense shadow in left lung in lung CT scan,
considering inflammatory changes and slight emphysema (especially in the left
lower lung) as well as bilateral renal calculus on February 8th. No significant
abnormalities were found in electrocardiogram and B ultrasound test of liver,
spleen, and pancreas. (4) Virus confirmation: Zika virus nucleic acid was
positive reported by Jiangxi Province Center for Disease Control and Prevention
(CDC) on February 7th and Chinese CDC on February 9th, respectively, though
Dengue virus were negative reported by Ganzhou CDC on February 6th. Right after
the first diagnosis, anyone who had been in close contact with the patient
received medical monitoring. (5)Treatment process: on February 6th, symptomatic
treatment was prescribed since admitted into the infectious isolation wards and
daily intravenous drip of Xiyanping injection 250 mg was prescribed for antiviral
therapy. On February 7th, the patient had no fever, with occasional chills, neck 
rash was disappeared, orbital pain relieved and bilateral conjunctival hyperemia 
range was paler and narrowed, and his condition improved. Ibuprofen was
administered for defervesce 3 times a day when his temperature reached to
37.5?centigrade at 16:00. On February 8th, the patient had no fever, times of
chills was significantly reduced, without myalgia and rash, orbital pain and
conjunctival hyperemia further recovered. On February 9th, bilateral eyes
slightly tingling, mild conjunctival congestion, no fever chills or other
discomfort was found. The chloramphenicol eye drops was prescribed for relieving 
sting pain with conjunctival congestion twice a day as recombinant human
interferon alpha eye drops was out of store. The patient was comfortable from
February 11th to February 13th. Blood and urine test for Zika were reported
negative by the Chinese CDC and Jiangxi Province CDC. Because all the discharge
criteria were satisfied, the patient was discharged on February 14th.
CONCLUSIONS: At present, there is no specific effective drug to prevent and treat
Zika virus disease effectually. After receiving symptomatic treatment and
antiviral treatments including Xiyanping injection, the patient's symptoms were
relieved. Zika virus nucleic acid in blood and urine was negative. The patient
was discharged. Combination of traditional Chinese medicine and Western medicine 
maybe a good method to prevent and treat Zika virus disease.

DOI: 10.3760/cma.j.issn.2095-4352.2016.02.005 
PMID: 26911940  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
