

382. J Gene Med. 2014 May-Jun;16(5-6):143-52. doi: 10.1002/jgm.2770.

Sustained local delivery of oncolytic short hairpin RNA adenoviruses for
treatment of head and neck cancer.

Jung SH(1), Choi JW, Yun CO, Yhee JY, Price R, Kim SH, Kwon IC, Ghandehari H.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Theragnosis, Biomedical Research Institute, Korea Institute of
Science and Technology, Seoul, Korea.

BACKGROUND: Oncolytic adenovirus (Ad)-mediated gene therapy is a promising
approach for suppression of primary tumors. Therapeutic efficacy of Ad-mediated
gene therapy has been limited by immunogenicity, rapid dissemination of viral
progenies into systemic circulation and short duration of biological activity.
Polymeric sustained local delivery can overcome many of these challenges to
produce a viable therapy with improved outcomes.
METHODS: Silk-elastinlike protein polymer (SELP) hydrogels were used for
matrix-mediated delivery of oncolytic Ad, containing short hairpin RNA (shRNA)
targeted to C-Met (sh-C-Met), to solid tumors in a nude mouse model of human head
and neck cancer. The biological activity of Ad released from SELP hydrogels was
examined as a function of time to investigate protective effects on viral
activity. Antitumor efficacy and viral distribution were investigated for 3 weeks
in tumor-bearing mice.
RESULTS: The encapsulation of Ad with SELP hydrogels sustained biological
activity longer than Ad alone. Ad in SELP matrix showed 1.5-fold greater
antitumor efficacy compared to that of naked Ad in human xenograft tumor models. 
Histological analysis demonstrated that treatment with Ad in a SELP matrix
resulted in apoptosis in a wider area of tumor tissue and higher density of Ad
infection compared to Ad administered alone.
CONCLUSIONS: Matrix-mediated delivery of Ad-containing shRNA with SELP hydrogels 
enhances therapeutic efficacy by tumor-selective infection, spatiotemporal
control and preservation of biologic activity.

Copyright © 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/jgm.2770 
PMID: 24962819  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
