

389. Int J Health Geogr. 2009 Nov 30;8:68. doi: 10.1186/1476-072X-8-68.

Usefulness of commercially available GPS data-loggers for tracking human movement
and exposure to dengue virus.

Vazquez-Prokopec GM(1), Stoddard ST, Paz-Soldan V, Morrison AC, Elder JP, Kochel 
TJ, Scott TW, Kitron U.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Studies, Emory University, Atlanta, GA, USA.
gmvazqu@emory.edu

BACKGROUND: Our understanding of the effects of human movement on dengue virus
spread remains limited in part due to the lack of precise tools to monitor the
time-dependent location of individuals. We determined the utility of a new,
commercially available, GPS data-logger for long-term tracking of human movements
in Iquitos, Peru. We conducted a series of evaluations focused on GPS device
attributes key to reliable use and accuracy. GPS observations from two
participants were later compared with semi-structured interview data to assess
the usefulness of GPS technology to track individual mobility patterns.
RESULTS: Positional point and line accuracy were 4.4 and 10.3 m, respectively.
GPS wearing mode increased spatial point error by 6.9 m. Units were worn on a
neck-strap by a carpenter and a moto-taxi driver for 14-16 days. The application 
of a clustering algorithm (I-cluster) to the raw GPS positional data allowed the 
identification of locations visited by each participant together with the
frequency and duration of each visit. The carpenter moved less and spent more
time in more fixed locations than the moto-taxi driver, who visited more
locations for a shorter period of time. GPS and participants' interviews
concordantly identified 6 common locations, whereas GPS alone identified 4
locations and participants alone identified 10 locations. Most (80%) of the
locations identified by participants alone were places reported as visited for
less than 30 minutes.
CONCLUSION: The present study demonstrates the feasibility of a novel,
commercially available GPS data-logger for long-term tracking of humans and shows
the potential of these units to quantify mobility patterns in relationship with
dengue virus transmission risk in a tropical urban environment. Cost, battery
life, size, programmability and ease of wear are unprecedented from previously
tested units, proving the usefulness of GPS-dataloggers for linking movement of
individuals and transmission risk of dengue virus and other infectious agents,
particularly in resource-poor settings.

DOI: 10.1186/1476-072X-8-68 
PMCID: PMC2792221
PMID: 19948034  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
