

390. Laryngoscope. 2014 May;124(5):1236-41. doi: 10.1002/lary.24376. Epub 2013 Dec 17.

Epstein-Barr DNA serology and positron-emission tomography imaging of the head
and neck in pediatric transplant recipients.

Sidell D(1), Venick RS, Shapiro NL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Head and Neck Surgery, David Geffen School of Medicine at
University of California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California, U.S.A.

OBJECTIVES/HYPOTHESIS: Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) infection is a potential
precursor of post-transplantation lymphoproliferative disorder (PTLD) in the
pediatric transplant patient. Positron-emission tomography (PET) imaging is
increasingly utilized in this population to monitor for neoplasia and PTLD. We
assess the association between EBV serum titers and Waldeyer's ring and cervical 
lymph node PET positivity in the pediatric transplant recipient.
STUDY DESIGN: Retrospective analysis of EBV serology and PET imaging results in
pediatric orthotopic liver transplantation (OLT) recipients.
METHODS: Imaging results and laboratory data were reviewed for all pediatric OLT 
recipients from January 2005 to July 2011 at a single institution. Charts were
evaluated for PET positivity at Waldeyer's ring or cervical lymphatics, and for
EBV serology results. Demographic data extracted include patient sex and age at
transplantation.
RESULTS: A total of 122 pediatric OLT recipients were reviewed. Twelve patients
(10%) underwent PET imaging. Overall, four patients (33%) had evidence of PET
positivity at Waldeyer's ring or cervical lymphatics. Five patients (42%) had
positive EBV serology. There was a significant association between PET imaging
results and EBV DNA serology results (P = .01).
CONCLUSIONS: PTLD surveillance in the pediatric transplant recipient is an
important component of long-term care in this population. Although PET imaging is
a new modality in monitoring pediatric transplant recipients for early signs of
PTLD, an association between EBV serology and PET imaging results appears to
exist. With increased implementation, PET imaging will likely prove valuable in
its ability to monitor the transplant recipient at risk for PTLD.

© 2013 The American Laryngological, Rhinological and Otological Society, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/lary.24376 
PMID: 24105893  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
