

424. Mol Pharm. 2010 Aug 2;7(4):1050-6. doi: 10.1021/mp100161u.

Silk-elastin-like hydrogel improves the safety of adenovirus-mediated
gene-directed enzyme-prodrug therapy.

Gustafson JA(1), Price RA, Greish K, Cappello J, Ghandehari H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioengineering, Utah Center for Nanomedicine, Nano Institute of 
Utah, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah 84108, USA.

Recombinant silk-elastin-like protein polymers (SELPs) are well-known for their
highly tunable properties on both the molecular and macroscopic hydrogel levels. 
One specific structure of these polymers, SELP-815K, has been investigated as an 
injectable controlled delivery system for the treatment of head and neck cancer
via a gene-directed enzyme prodrug therapy (GDEPT) approach. Due to its pore size
and gelation properties in vivo, SELP restricts the distribution and controls the
release of therapeutic viruses for up to one month. It has been shown that
SELP-mediated delivery significantly improves therapeutic outcome of the herpes
simplex virus thymidine kinase (HSVtk)/ganciclovir (GCV) system in xenograft
models of human head and neck cancer. However little is known about potential
benefits of this approach with regard to toxicity in the presence of a fully
intact immune system. The studies presented here were designed to assess the
change in toxicity of the SELP-mediated viral delivery compared to free viral
injection in a non-tumor-bearing immune competent mouse model. Toxicity was
assessed at 1, 2, 4, and 12 weeks via body weight monitoring, complete blood
count (CBC), and blood chemistry. It was found that in the acute and subacute
phases (weeks 1-4) there is significant toxicity in groups combining the virus
and the prodrug, and matrix-mediated gene delivery with SELP demonstrates a
reduction in toxicity from the 2 week time point through the 4 week time point.
At the end of the subchronic phase (12 weeks), signs of toxicity had subsided in 
both groups. Based on these results, recombinant SELPs offer a significant
reduction in toxicity of virus-mediated GDEPT treatment compared to free virus
injection in the acute and subacute phases.

DOI: 10.1021/mp100161u 
PMCID: PMC2933176
PMID: 20586469  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
