

430. BMC Cancer. 2012 Aug 24;12:368. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-12-368.

Reovirus exerts potent oncolytic effects in head and neck cancer cell lines that 
are independent of signalling in the EGFR pathway.

Twigger K(1), Roulstone V, Kyula J, Karapanagiotou EM, Syrigos KN, Morgan R,
White C, Bhide S, Nuovo G, Coffey M, Thompson B, Jebar A, Errington F, Melcher
AA, Vile RG, Pandha HS, Harrington KJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cancer Biology Chester Beatty Laboratories, The Institute of
Cancer Research, 237 Fulham Road, London, SW3 6JB, UK.

BACKGROUND: Reovirus exploits aberrant signalling downstream of Ras to mediate
tumor-specific oncolysis. Since ~90% squamous cell carcinomas of the head and
neck (SCCHN) over-express EGFR and SCCHN cell lines are sensitive to oncolytic
reovirus, we conducted a detailed analysis of the effects of reovirus in 15 head 
and neck cancer cell lines. Both pre- and post-entry events were studied in an
attempt to define biomarkers predictive of sensitivity/resistance to reovirus. In
particular, we analysed the role of EGFR/Ras signalling in determining
virus-mediated cytotoxicity in SCCHN.
METHODS: To test whether EGFR pathway activity was predictive of increased
sensitivity to reovirus, correlative analyses between reoviral IC50 by MTT assay 
and EGFR levels by western blot and FACS were conducted. Inhibition or
stimulation of EGFR signalling were analysed for their effect on reoviral
oncolysis by MTT assay, and viral growth by TCID50 assay. We next analysed the
effects of inhibiting signalling downstream of Ras, by specific inhibitors of
p38MAPK, PI3-K or MEK, on reoviral killing examined by MTT assay. The role of PKR
in reoviral killing was also determined by blockade of PKR using 2-aminopurine
and assaying for cell survival by MTT assay. The apoptotic response of SCCHN to
reovirus was examined by western blot analysis of caspase 3 cleavage.
RESULTS: Correlative analyses between reoviral sensitivity and EGFR levels
revealed no association. Intermediate sub-viral and core particles showed the
same infectivity/cytotoxicity as intact reovirus. Therefore, sensitivity was not 
determined by cell entry. In 4 cell lines, oncolysis and viral growth were both
unaffected by inhibition or stimulation of EGFR signalling. Inhibition of
signalling downstream of Ras did not abrogate reoviral oncolysis and, in
addition, modulation of PKR using 2-aminopurine did not alter reovirus
sensitivity in resistant cell lines. Caspase 3 cleavage was not detected in
infected cells and oncolysis was observed in pan-caspase inhibited cells.
CONCLUSIONS: In summary, reovirus is potently oncolytic in a broad panel of SCCHN
cell lines. Attempts to define sensitivity/resistance by analysis of the
EGFR/Ras/MAPK pathway have failed to provide a clear predictive biomarker of
response. Further analysis of material from in vitro and clinical studies is
ongoing in an attempt to shed further light on this issue.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2407-12-368 
PMCID: PMC3537694
PMID: 22920673  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
