

44. Head Neck. 2015 Sep;37(9):1310-8. doi: 10.1002/hed.23751. Epub 2014 Jul 19.

Identification of human papillomavirus status specific biomarker in head and neck
cancer.

Kim KY(1), Zhang X(2), Cha IH(1)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Oral Cancer Research Institute, College of Dentistry, Yonsei University,
Seoul.
(2)Department of Pathology, Yanbian University Medical College, Yanji City, Jilin
Province, China.
(3)Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, College of Dentistry, Yonsei
University, Seoul.

BACKGROUND: In an attempt to improve the prognosis of patients with head and neck
cancer, it could be necessary to identify biomarkers in homogeneous subgroups of 
patients with head and neck cancer.
METHODS: We explored the necessity of human papillomavirus (HPV) status-specific 
biomarkers in patients with head and neck cancer and identified an HPV
status-specific gene set. The identified gene set was validated with the external
microarray datasets. For this purpose, we used 4 microarray datasets obtained
from a public database. One dataset was used for identifying the HPV status
specific gene set, and the other datasets were used for validation.
RESULTS: The identified gene set for distinguishing head and neck cancer from
head and neck normal, did not accurately discriminate the HPV specific patients
with head and neck cancer from the head and neck normal group. Also, it was
demonstrated that some HPV-positive (HPV+) head and neck cancer-specific genes
may not be significant in HPV-negative (HPV-) head and neck cancer patients. The 
identified HPV specific gene sets showed good performance in validation datasets.
The HPV+ head and neck cancer-specific gene set included various
metabolism-related pathways, and the HPV- head and neck cancer-specific gene set 
included several pathways; fibroblast, collagen degradation, actin-binding, and
actin cytoskeleton.
CONCLUSION: The identification of HPV status-specific significant gene set was
necessary. It is expected that HPV status-specific biomarkers can be helpful in
deciding therapeutic methods for patients with head and neck cancer, after
biological validation and large prospective trials.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/hed.23751 
PMID: 24817691  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
