

456. Oncol Rep. 2010 Feb;23(2):355-63.

Antitumor effects of telomelysin in combination with paclitaxel or cisplatin on
head and neck squamous cell carcinoma.

Kondo N(1), Tsukuda M, Kimura M, Fujita K, Sakakibara A, Takahashi H, Ishiguro Y,
Toth G, Matsuda H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology and Function in Head and Neck, Yokohama City University 
Graduate School of Medicine, Kanazawa-ku, Yokohama, Japan.
t076022c@yokohama-cu.ac.jp

Telomelysin (OBP-301) is a telomerase-specific replication-component adenovirus. 
Telomelysin has a human telomerase reverse transcriptase (hTERT) promoter element
which efficiently kills human cancer cells, but not normal cells. The present
study investigated the correlation between the antitumor effect of telomelysin
and mRNA expression of hTERT and coxsackievirus and adenovirus receptor (CAR) in 
head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) in vitro and whether telomelysin
enhances the antitumor effect of paclitaxel or cisplatin, in vivo using a HNSCC
xenograft model. We also determined the optimal order for combining telomelysin
treatment and chemotherapy as concurrent treatment, telomelysin treatment first
and chemotherapy later, chemotherapy first and telomelysin treatment later for
achieving the best anticancer effect. The mRNA expression of hTERT and CAR genes 
was examined by quantitative RT-PCR in 17 HNSCC cell lines. There was no
significant correlation between the growth inhibition of telomelysin (ID50 for
day 3, 5 and 7) in vitro and mRNA expression levels of hTERT and CAR. Regarding
the correlation between CAR expression and telomelysin ID50 for day 3, all cell
lines that showed a relative amount of CAR/beta-actin mRNA >0.4 had a low
telomelysin ID50. This may indicate that CAR expression contributes to the
efficacy of adenovirus infection and the antitumor activity of telomelysin in
early stages of treatment. In our in vivo study, combining telomelysin and
paclitaxel had an additive effect regardless of treatment order. On the other
hand, combining telomelysin and cisplatin had additive effect only when cisplatin
treatment preceded telomelysin treatment. These results suggest that paclitaxel
is considered innocuous for replication of telomelysin, however cisplatin may
influence replication of telomelysin.


PMID: 20043095  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
