

484. Cochlear Implants Int. 2009 Dec;10(4):229-36. doi: 10.1179/cim.2009.10.4.229.

Cochlear implant and delayed facial palsy.

Joseph ST(1), Vishwakarma R, Ramani MK, Aurora R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Head & Neck Surgery, Government Medical
College & Sir T Hospital, Bhavnagar, Gujarat, India, PIN-364001.
shawndr@gmail.com

Delayed facial nerve palsy following cochlear implant surgery is less documented 
though it poses diagnostic and therapeutic challenges. Apart from the functional,
aesthetic and emotional concerns, it can raise important medico legal issues. The
objectives of this study were: to report a case of delayed facial palsy following
cochlear implant surgery in a patient who had positive viral antibody markers pre
operatively; and to review the literature on delayed onset facial paralysis
following viral reactivation and its relation to cochlear implant surgery. An
extensive literature review was done using internet and medical search engines
and library facilities. Important articles on the topic were identified and
summarised. Data on delayed facial palsy following cochlear implant surgery were 
collected, constructed in a coherent way and details discussed. Postulated
mechanisms of delayed facial palsy include neural oedema, vasospasm and viral
reactivation. Of these, reactivation of previous herpes simplex virus infection
has special significance, as many of these patients are positive for viral
antibody markers. Manipulation of sensory branches of the facial nerve and chorda
tympani can be a mechanism in such cases. Correlation of clinical presentation
and pre operative positive viral antibody markers with positive polymerase chain 
reaction can be strongly suggestive of viral reactivation. It is concluded that
patients with positive viral antibody markers are more susceptible to facial
palsy from viral reactivation. Corticosteroids, antiviral agents and
physiotherapy can be useful in producing a quicker and complete recovery. An
experienced cochlear implant surgery team and pre operative radiological
evaluations are mandatory to decrease the chances of direct facial nerve trauma. 
Proper irrigation lowers the risk of neural oedema.

(c) 2009 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1179/cim.2009.10.4.229 
PMID: 19194876  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
