

504. PLoS One. 2013 Oct 18;8(10):e76472. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0076472.
eCollection 2013.

Variant splicing and influence of ionizing radiation on human endogenous
retrovirus K (HERV-K) transcripts in cancer cell lines.

Agoni L(1), Lenz J, Guha C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, New York,
United States of America.

Human endogenous retrovirus K (HERV-K) is the most intact retrovirus in the human
genome. There are multiple full-length or near full-length HERV-K proviruses in
it. To analyze which HERV-K proviruses give rise to viral transcripts in cancer
cell lines and to test whether ionizing radiation can alter the levels of HERV-K 
transcripts, RT-PCR studies were undertaken using multiple human cancer cell
lines. Primers from several positions in the viral genome were used and included 
pairs designed to cross splice junctions in viral RNAs. In the absence of
ionizing radiation, transcripts were detected from multiple HERV-K proviruses in 
cell lines from human prostate, cervical, head and neck, or breast cancers, and
the proviruses from which the transcripts originated varied among the different
lines. Only one of 13 cell lines tested (cervical cancer line C33A) failed to
show HERV-K transcripts. Spliced RNAs detected included viral RNAs spliced as
expected at the conventional viral splice sites, plus several alternatively
spliced RNAs. Alternatively spliced transcripts arose from specific proviruses,
and were detected in most of the cell lines used. Quantitative RT-PCR was
performed to assess the effects of ionizing radiation. These analyses showed that
HERV-K transcripts were elevated in four of twelve lines tested, specifically all
three prostate cancer lines used and one breast cancer line. The increases were
transient, peaking at 24 hours following a single dose of gamma-irradiation that 
ranged from 2.5 to 20 Gy, and returning to baseline levels by 72 hours. In
summary, these studies showed that ionizing radiation can affect the levels of
HERV-K transcripts in cells, and these effects vary among different cells. The
changes in HERV-K transcript levels might affect multiple biological processes in
cells, and future studies of the effects of ionizing radiation on HERV-K are
worth pursuing.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0076472 
PMCID: PMC3799738
PMID: 24204631  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
