

512. BMC Cancer. 2018 Feb 8;18(1):166. doi: 10.1186/s12885-018-4087-1.

Assessing the performance of a Loop Mediated Isothermal Amplification (LAMP)
assay for the detection and subtyping of high-risk suptypes of Human Papilloma
Virus (HPV) for Oropharyngeal Squamous Cell Carcinoma (OPSCC) without DNA
purification.

Rohatensky MG(1), Livingstone DM(2), Mintchev P(3), Barnes HK(3), Nakoneshny
SC(4), Demetrick DJ(5), Dort JC(2)(4), van Marle G(6)(7).

Author information: 
(1)Undergraduate Medical Education, Faculty of Medicine & Dentistry, University
of Alberta, Edmonton, AB, Canada.
(2)Section of Otolaryngology - Head and Neck Surgery, Department of Surgery,
Cumming School of Medicine, University of Calgary, Calgary, AB, Canada.
(3)Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Infectious Diseases, Cumming School
of Medicine, University of Calgary, Calgary, AB, Canada.
(4)Ohlson Research Initiative, Arnie Charbonneau Cancer Institute, Cumming School
of Medicine, University of Calgary, Calgary, AB, Canada.
(5)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Cumming School of Medicine,
University of Calgary and Calgary Laboratory Services, Calgary, AB, Canada.
(6)Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Infectious Diseases, Cumming School
of Medicine, University of Calgary, Calgary, AB, Canada. vanmarle@ucalgary.ca.
(7)Snyder Institute for Chronic Diseases, Cumming School of Medicine, University 
of Calgary, Calgary, AB, Canada. vanmarle@ucalgary.ca.

BACKGROUND: Oropharyngeal Squamous Cell Carcinoma (OPSCC) is increasing in
incidence despite a decline in traditional risk factors. Human Papilloma Virus
(HPV), specifically subtypes 16, 18, 31 and 35, has been implicated as the
high-risk etiologic agent. HPV positive cancers have a significantly better
prognosis than HPV negative cancers of comparable stage, and may benefit from
different treatment regimens. Currently, HPV related carcinogenesis is
established indirectly through Immunohistochemistry (IHC) staining for p16, a
tumour suppressor gene, or polymerase chain reaction (PCR) that directly tests
for HPV DNA in biopsied tissue. Loop mediated isothermal amplification (LAMP) is 
more accurate than IHC, more rapid than PCR and is significantly less costly. In 
previous work we showed that a subtype specific HPV LAMP assay performed similar 
to PCR on purified DNA. In this study we examined the performance of this LAMP
assay without DNA purification.
METHODS: We used LAMP assays using established primers for HPV 16 and 18, and new
primers for HPV 31 and 35. LAMP reaction conditions were tested on serial
dilutions of plasmid HPV DNA to confirm minimum viral copy number detection
thresholds. LAMP was then performed directly on different human cell line samples
without DNA purification.
RESULTS: Our LAMP assays could detect 105, 103, 104, and 105 copies of plasmid
DNA for HPV 16, 18, 31, and 35, respectively. All primer sets were subtype
specific, with no cross-amplification. Our LAMP assays also reliably amplified
subtype specific HPV DNA from samples without requiring DNA isolation and
purification.
CONCLUSIONS: The high risk OPSCC HPV subtype specific LAMP primer sets
demonstrated, excellent clinically relevant, minimum copy number detection
thresholds with an easy readout system. Amplification directly from samples
without purification illustrated the robust nature of the assay, and the primers 
used. This lends further support HPV type specific LAMP assays, and these
specific primer sets and assays can be further developed to test for HPV in OPSCC
in resource and lab limited settings, or even bedside testing.

DOI: 10.1186/s12885-018-4087-1 
PMCID: PMC5806493
PMID: 29422018  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
