

545. Cir Cir. 2016 Sep-Oct;84(5):363-8. doi: 10.1016/j.circir.2016.01.006. Epub 2016
Mar 28.

[Prevalence of human papillomavirus infection in squamous cell carcinoma of the
oral cavity, oropharynx and larynx].

[Article in Spanish]

Villagómez-Ortíz VJ(1), Paz-Delgadillo DE(2), Marino-Martínez I(3),
Ceseñas-Falcón LÁ(4), Sandoval-de la Fuente A(2), Reyes-Escobedo A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Servicio de Otorrinolaringología, Hospital Universitario Dr. José Eleuterio
González, Facultad de Medicina, Universidad Autónoma de Nuevo León, Monterrey,
Nuevo León, México. Electronic address: centrodevoz@yahoo.com.mx.
(2)Servicio de Otorrinolaringología, Hospital Universitario Dr. José Eleuterio
González, Facultad de Medicina, Universidad Autónoma de Nuevo León, Monterrey,
Nuevo León, México.
(3)Centro de Investigación y Desarrollo en Ciencias de la Salud, Universidad
Autónoma de Nuevo León, Monterrey, Nuevo León, México.
(4)Servicio de Anatomía Patológica, Hospital Universitario Dr. José Eleuterio
González, Facultad de Medicina, Universidad Autónoma de Nuevo León, Monterrey,
Nuevo León, México.

BACKGROUND: Cancer of the head and neck comprises a group of neoplasms that share
a similar anatomical origin. Most originate from the epithelium of the
aerodigestive tract and 90% correspond to squamous cell carcinoma. In the last 15
years, an increase in the incidence of squamous cell carcinoma induced by human
papillomavirus (HPV) has been seen, mainly types 16 and 18, which are the most
frequent found in cancers of the oral cavity and oropharynx, and types 6 and 11
in laryngeal cancer. There are reports in the literature that show HPV as the
leading cause of oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma.
OBJECTIVE: Determine the prevalence of infection with high-risk HPV in patients
diagnosed with squamous cell carcinoma of the oral cavity, oropharynx and larynx.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: An observational, cross-sectional, descriptive, unblinded
study was performed. Prevalence of HPV infection was determined by polymerase
chain reaction (PCR) in DNA samples from tumour tissue of patients with squamous 
cell carcinoma of the oral cavity, oropharynx and larynx. Typing was subsequently
performed in HPV positive samples in order to detect types 18, 16, 11 and 6,
using custom primers.
RESULTS: A total of 45 patients were included. The association between laryngeal 
squamous cell carcinoma and HPV was established in two patients, which
represented an overall prevalence of 4.4% in our population, and 10% for
laringeal tumours.
CONCLUSIONS: There is a low prevalence of HPV infection in squamous cell
carcinoma of the oral cavity, oropharynx and larynx, in our population.
Prospective studies on younger patients could provide more information.

Copyright © 2016 Academia Mexicana de Cirugía A.C. Publicado por Masson Doyma
México S.A. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.circir.2016.01.006 
PMID: 27032466  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
