

566. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2016 Dec;1866(2):141-150. doi: 10.1016/j.bbcan.2016.07.005.
Epub 2016 Jul 31.

Human papillomavirus in oropharyngeal cancer: The changing face of a disease.

Mallen-St Clair J(1), Alani M(2), Wang MB(3), Srivatsan ES(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Head and Neck Surgery, David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA, 
Los Angeles, CA, United States.
(2)UCLA School of Dentistry, Los Angeles, CA, United States.
(3)Department of Head and Neck Surgery, David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA, 
Los Angeles, CA, United States; Department of Surgery, Veterans Affairs Greater
Los Angeles Healthcare System/David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA, Los
Angeles, CA, United States; Member of Jonsson Comprehensive Cancer Center, UCLA, 
Los Angeles, CA, United States.
(4)Department of Surgery, Veterans Affairs Greater Los Angeles Healthcare
System/David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA, Los Angeles, CA, United States;
Member of Jonsson Comprehensive Cancer Center, UCLA, Los Angeles, CA, United
States. Electronic address: esrivats@g.ucla.edu.

The last decade has brought about an unexpected rise in oropharyngeal squamous
cell carcinoma (OPSCC) primarily in white males from the ages of 40-55years, with
limited exposure to alcohol and tobacco. This subset of squamous cell carcinoma
(SCC) has been found to be associated with human papillomavirus infection (HPV). 
Other Head and Neck Squamous Cell carcinoma (HNSCC) subtypes include oral cavity,
hypopharyngeal, nasopharyngeal, and laryngeal SCC which tend to be HPV negative. 
HPV associated oropharyngeal cancer has proven to differ from alcohol and tobacco
associated oropharyngeal carcinoma in regards to the molecular pathophysiology,
presentation, epidemiology, prognosis, and improved response to chemoradiation
therapy. Given the improved survival of patients with HPV associated SCC, efforts
to de-intensify treatment to decrease treatment related morbidity are at the
forefront of clinical research. This review will focus on the important
differences between HPV and tobacco related oropharyngeal cancer. We will review 
the molecular pathogenesis of HPV related oropharyngeal cancer with an emphasis
on new paradigms for screening and treating this disease.

Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbcan.2016.07.005 
PMID: 27487173  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
