

597. Oral Oncol. 2014 Apr;50(4):241-6. doi: 10.1016/j.oraloncology.2013.12.012. Epub
2014 Jan 13.

Patients with HPV-related tonsil squamous cell carcinoma rarely harbour oncogenic
HPV infection at other pharyngeal sites.

Thavaraj S(1), Stokes A(2), Mazuno K(3), Henley-Smith R(4), Suh YE(4), Paleri
V(5), Tavassoli M(6), Odell E(2), Robinson M(7).

Author information: 
(1)Oral Pathology, King's College London Dental Institute, London, United
Kingdom. Electronic address: selvam.thavaraj@kcl.ac.uk.
(2)Oral Pathology, King's College London Dental Institute, London, United
Kingdom.
(3)Department of Oral Pathology, Osaka Dental University, Osaka, Japan.
(4)Oral Pathology, Guy's and St. Thomas' NHS Foundation Trust, London, United
Kingdom.
(5)Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Newcastle upon Tyne Hospitals NHS Trust,
United Kingdom.
(6)Molecular Oncology, King's College London Dental Institute, London, United
Kingdom.
(7)Centre for Oral Health Research, School of Dental Sciences, Newcastle
University, Newcastle Upon Tyne, United Kingdom.

OBJECTIVES: Patients with human papillomavirus (HPV)-related oropharyngeal
squamous cell carcinoma (OPSCC) have a reduced risk of developing second primary 
upper aerodigestive tract (UADT) tumours compared to patients with HPV-negative
primary tumours at the same site. To determine whether this finding might be
explained by a lack of viral-induced field cancerisation or multifocal infection,
we investigated whether there was epithelial dysplasia and/or evidence of HPV
infection at other pharyngeal mucosal sites in patients presenting with the
disease.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Sixty-three patients with primary tonsil SCC and 108
pharyngeal endoscopic biopsies, representing at least one pharyngeal subsite from
each patient, were included in this study. Tissue samples were tested using HPV
PCR (GP5+/6+), p16 immunohistochemistry (IHC) and high risk HPV DNA in situ
hybridisation (ISH).
RESULTS: There were 46 patients with HPV-related SCC and 17 patients with
HPV-negative disease. PCR detected HPV DNA in a fifth of pharyngeal endoscopic
biopsies and was equally likely to be from a patient with HPV-related SCC as from
a patient with HPV negative disease. All PCR positive cases were tested using p16
IHC and high risk HPV ISH and only three biopsies were positive. Significantly,
these three biopsies all showed evidence of epithelial dysplasia and were from
patients with an HPV positive index tumour.
CONCLUSION: Our data suggest that virus-induced field cancerisation and/or
multifocal oncogenic HPV infection of the pharynx is uncommon in OPSCC and
supports the concept that these patients have a lower risk of developing second
primary tumours of the UADT.

Copyright © 2013 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.oraloncology.2013.12.012 
PMID: 24434066  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
