

612. Ann Oncol. 2016 Sep;27(9):1675-85. doi: 10.1093/annonc/mdw226. Epub 2016 Jul 5.

The promise of immunotherapy in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma.

Economopoulou P(1), Agelaki S(2), Perisanidis C(3), Giotakis EI(4), Psyrri A(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Section of Medical Oncology, Attikon
University Hospital, National Kapodistrian University of Athens, School of
Medicine, Athens psyrri237@yahoo.com.
(2)Department of Medical Oncology, University Hospital of Heraklion, Heraklion
Laboratory of Tumor Biology, School of Medicine, University of Crete, Heraklion, 
Crete, Greece.
(3)Department of Maxillofacial and Oral Surgery, Medical University of Vienna,
Vienna, Austria.
(4)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Facial Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery, 
Städtisches Klinikum Karlsruhe, Karlsruhe, Germany.
(5)Department of Internal Medicine, Section of Medical Oncology, Attikon
University Hospital, National Kapodistrian University of Athens, School of
Medicine, Athens.

Squamous cell cancers of the head and neck (HNSCC) comprise a diverse group of
malignancies that includes tobacco-related tumors in addition to an increasing
number of human papillomavirus-associated cancers. Independently of cause, there 
is a growing body of evidence supporting that the immune system plays a pivotal
role in HNSCC development, as tumor cells evade immunosurveillance by exploiting 
inhibitory checkpoint pathways that suppress anti-tumor T-cell responses. HNSCC
cells have the ability to manipulate the immune system through a variety of
different mechanisms, forcing it to promote tumor growth and spread. Over the
last decade, discoveries in immunologic research resulted in increased
understanding of complex interactions between HNSCC and the host immune system as
well as T-cell regulatory mechanisms, promoting the development of a variety of
novel immunotherapies. Following the availability of novel immunotherapeutic
strategies, the challenge for clinicians is to understand how and in which
clinical setting to use these agents in order to provide greater clinical benefit
for patients. Combination of immunotherapies with standard treatment approaches
also represents an evolving field of research. Herein, we provide a comprehensive
review of immune escape mechanisms in HNSCC, as well as current immunotherapy
approaches under investigation.

© The Author 2016. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the European
Society for Medical Oncology. All rights reserved. For permissions, please email:
journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/annonc/mdw226 
PMID: 27380958  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
