

632. Ann Oncol. 2016 Oct;27(10):1848-54. doi: 10.1093/annonc/mdw272. Epub 2016 Jul 25.

Best practice guidelines in the psychosocial management of HPV-related head and
neck cancer: recommendations from the European Head and Neck Cancer Society's
Make Sense Campaign.

Reich M(1), Licitra L(2), Vermorken JB(3), Bernier J(4), Parmar S(5), Golusinski 
W(6), Castellsagué X(7), Leemans CR(8).

Author information: 
(1)Psycho-Oncology Team, Centre Oscar Lambret, Lille, France
m-reich@o-lambret.fr.
(2)Istituto Nazionale per lo Studio e la Cura dei Tumori, Milan, Italy.
(3)Department of Medical Oncology, Antwerp University Hospital, Antwerp, Belgium.
(4)Radio-Oncology Division at the Swiss Genolier Medical Network, Geneva,
Switzerland.
(5)Maxillofacial Department, Queen Elizabeth Hospital, Birmingham, UK.
(6)The Greater Poland Cancer Centre, Poznań University of Medical Sciences,
Poznań, Poland.
(7)Cancer Epidemiology Research Program, Institut Català d'Oncologia (ICO),
IDIBELL, CIBER Epidemiología y Salud Pública (CIBERESP), L'Hospitalet de
Llobregat, Catalonia, Spain.
(8)Department of Otolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, VU University Medical
Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

Over the past three decades, oral human papillomavirus (HPV) has been associated 
with an increase in the incidence of oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma
(OPSCC) in several countries. Specialist oncologists in head and neck cancer are 
observing a wider range of demographics, sexual behaviours, and survival outcomes
with their patients. Additionally, there are fewer smokers, consumers of alcohol,
or people of lower socioeconomic status than in previous decades. In order to
support patients, the European Head and Neck Society's Make Sense Campaign aims
to promote best practice in the management of head and neck cancer through the
delivery of counselling, psychological assessment, support with the patient
experience following HPV-related cancer diagnosis, sexual impact (in terms of
communication, behaviour and prevention), facilitating access to educational
resources about HPV in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma and OPSCC, and early
referral if necessary. New concerns about psychosocial distress and unmet
psychosocial needs following diagnosis, therefore, exist throughout the disease
and treatment periods. Oncologists treating patients with HPV-related head and
neck cancer must integrate new parameters focused on infection risk transmission 
and sexual topics. The development and dissemination of best practice guidelines 
through The European Head and Neck Cancer Society Make Sense Campaign will help
healthcare professionals to be more confident and resourceful in supporting
patients with HPV-related head and neck cancer.

© The Author 2016. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the European
Society for Medical Oncology. All rights reserved. For permissions, please email:
journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/annonc/mdw272 
PMID: 27456297  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
