

649. Gene Ther. 2013 May;20(5):521-8. doi: 10.1038/gt.2012.68. Epub 2012 Aug 16.

Synergistic cytotoxicity of oncolytic reovirus in combination with
cisplatin-paclitaxel doublet chemotherapy.

Roulstone V(1), Twigger K, Zaidi S, Pencavel T, Kyula JN, White C, McLaughlin M, 
Seth R, Karapanagiotou EM, Mansfield D, Coffey M, Nuovo G, Vile RG, Pandha HS,
Melcher AA, Harrington KJ.

Author information: 
(1)Targeted Therapy Laboratory, Section of Cell and Molecular Biology, Chester
Beatty Laboratories, The Institute of Cancer Research, Division of Cell Biology, 
London, UK.

Oncolytic reovirus is currently under active investigation in a range of tumour
types. Early phase studies have shown that this agent has modest monotherapy
efficacy and its future development is likely to focus on combination regimens
with cytotoxic chemotherapy. Indeed, phase I/II clinical trials have confirmed
that reovirus can be safely combined with cytotoxic drugs, including a
platin-taxane doublet regimen, which is currently being tested in a phase III
clinical trial in patients with relapsed/metastatic head and neck cancer.
Therefore, we have tested this triple (reovirus, cisplatin, paclitaxel)
combination therapy in a panel of four head and neck cancer cell lines. Using the
combination index (CI) method, the triple therapy demonstrated synergistic
cytotoxicity in vitro in both malignant and non-malignant cell lines. In head and
neck cancer cell lines, this was associated with enhanced caspase 3 and 7
cleavage, but no increase in viral replication. In vitro analyses confirmed
colocalisation of markers of reovirus infection and caspase 3. Triple therapy was
significantly more effective than reovirus or cisplatin-paclitaxel in athymic
nude mice. These data suggest that the combination of reovirus plus platin-taxane
doublet chemotherapy has significant activity in head and neck cancer and
underpin the current phase III study in this indication.

DOI: 10.1038/gt.2012.68 
PMCID: PMC4821071
PMID: 22895509  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
