

665. Am J Case Rep. 2015 Oct 30;16:774-7.

Epstein-Barr Virus-Associated Atraumatic Spleen Laceration Presenting with Neck
and Shoulder Pain.

Sergent SR(1), Johnson SM(1), Ashurst J(1), Johnston G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Emergency Medicine, Conemaugh Memorial Hospital, Johnstown, PA, 
USA.

BACKGROUND: Infectious mononucleosis, caused by the Epstein-Barr virus (EBV), is 
a common infection with worldwide distribution; more than 90% of people have been
infected by adulthood. One of the most feared, albeit rare, complications,
occurring in less than 0.5% of those infected, is splenic injury or rupture.
CASE REPORT: A febrile 15-year-old male presented to the emergency department
with the chief compliant of headache, neck pain, and upper shoulder pain. He did 
not recall any specific traumatic injury. His abdomen was soft, nondistended, and
was tender in the right and left lower quadrants. Right lower quadrant ultrasound
demonstrated non-visualization of the appendix, moderate right lower quadrant
free fluid, and positive McBurney's sign. CT of the abdomen and pelvis was
ordered, which demonstrated moderate splenomegaly, with findings compatible with 
laceration through the anterior aspect of the spleen, with moderate
hemoperitoneum. Monospot was negative and EBV panel demonstrated IGG negative,
IGM positive, and, IGG negative. The patient was transferred to interventional
radiology for a splenic angiogram and proximal splenic artery embolization. The
angiogram demonstrated grade 3 laceration with moderate hemoperitoneum and no
active extravasation or evidence of pseudoaneurysm. The patient was admitted and 
made a prompt recovery without any other sequelae.
CONCLUSIONS: The presentation of splenic injury or rupture can vary; the patient 
may complain of abdominal pain or left upper quadrant pain, may exhibit referred 
left shoulder pain when the LUQ is palpated (Kehr's Sign), or may exhibit
hemodynamic instability. Given the spectrum of non-specific symptoms, diagnosing 
EBV-induced splenic laceration can be difficult.


PMCID: PMC4631128
PMID: 26516137  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
