

667. BMC Infect Dis. 2015 Jan 9;15:8. doi: 10.1186/s12879-014-0737-3.

Human papillomavirus serology and tobacco smoking in a community control group.

Kelsey KT(1)(2), Nelson HH(3), Kim S(4), Pawlita M(5), Langevin SM(6)(7), Eliot
M(8), Michaud DS(9), McClean M(10).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology, Brown University School of Public Health,
Providence, RI, USA. karl_kelsey@brown.edu.
(2)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Brown University School of
Medicine, Providence, RI, USA. karl_kelsey@brown.edu.
(3)Masonic Cancer Center, Division of Epidemiology and Community Health,
University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN, USA. hhnelson@umn.edu.
(4)Department of Epidemiology, Brown University School of Public Health,
Providence, RI, USA. stephanie_min@brown.edu.
(5)Research Program Infection and Cancer, German Cancer Research Center, DKFZ,
Heidelberg, Germany. m.pawlita@dkfz-heidelberg.de.
(6)Department of Epidemiology, Brown University School of Public Health,
Providence, RI, USA. langevst@ucmail.uc.edu.
(7)Department of Environmental Health, University of Cincinnati School of
Medicine, Cincinnati, OH, USA. langevst@ucmail.uc.edu.
(8)Department of Epidemiology, Brown University School of Public Health,
Providence, RI, USA. melissa_eliot@brown.edu.
(9)Department of Epidemiology, Brown University School of Public Health,
Providence, RI, USA. Dominique_michaud@brown.edu.
(10)Department of Environmental Health, Boston University School of Public
Health, Boston, MA, USA. mmcclean@bu.edu.

BACKGROUND: HPV infection is an established risk factor for oropharyngeal cancer,
and it has been proposed that cigarette smoking may potentiate HPV infection in
the oral epithelium. We sought to test the hypothesis that cigarette smoking
increases HPV infection in an HPV16 serology study of cancer-free individuals.
METHODS: Subjects were participants in a risk factor study for head and neck
cancer, and were required to have no prior history of either HNSCC or any other
cancer. Tobacco use and other risk factor data were gathered through
interviewer-assisted questionnaires, while serology was conducted in a blinded
fashion using a glutathione S-transferase capture enzyme-linked immunosorbent
assay (ELISA) to detect antibodies against HPV16 L1, E1, E2, E4, E6 and E7
proteins. The differences in tobacco use by HPV serology were evaluated by ANOVA;
and the reported odds ratios and 95% confidence intervals were determined by
using unconditional logistic regression.
RESULTS: We found no overall association of HPV16 serological markers with
smoking. However, when the data were stratified by median age, smoking was
positively associated with seropositivity for the HPV16 L1 capsid antigen in the 
younger controls while the older controls were less likely to be HPV16 L1
positive if they smoked (pinteraction < 0.002). There was no similar association 
of smoking and age with serological response to the early proteins (i.e E6, E7).
CONCLUSIONS: Exposure to HPV16 capsid protein (L1) is increased among relatively 
younger adults who smoke and diminished among older smokers. However, this
pattern is not accompanied by a differential susceptibility for active infection 
(as determined by the early gene proteins such as E6 and E7) among young and
older smokers.

DOI: 10.1186/s12879-014-0737-3 
PMCID: PMC4296688
PMID: 25572638  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
