

672. PLoS One. 2017 Sep 19;12(9):e0184201. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0184201.
eCollection 2017.

No evidence for the presence of Epstein-Barr virus in squamous cell carcinoma of 
the mobile tongue.

Wilms T(1), Khan G(2), Coates PJ(3), Sgaramella N(4), Fåhraeus R(3)(4)(5),
Hassani A(2), Philip PS(2), Norberg Spaak L(1), Califano L(6), Colella G(7),
Olofsson K(1), Loizou C(1), Franco R(8), Nylander K(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Sciences/ENT, Umeå University, Umeå, Sweden.
(2)United Arab Emirates University, College of Medicine & Health Sciences, Dept. 
of Medical Microbiology and Immunology, Tawam Hospital Campus, Al Ain, UAE.
(3)RECAMO, Masaryk Memorial Cancer Institute, Zluty kopec 7, Brno, Czech
Republic.
(4)Department of Medical Biosciences, Umeå University, Umeå, Sweden.
(5)University Paris Diderot, INSERM UMRS1162, 27 rue Juliette Dodu, Paris,
France.
(6)Department of Neuroscience Reproductive and Dentistry Sciences, University of 
Naples Federico II, Naples, Italy.
(7)Second University of Naples, Multidisciplinary Department of Medical, Surgical
and Dental Specialties, Naples, Italy.
(8)Dipartimento Universitario di Anatomia Patologica, Seconda Universita' Degli
Studi di Napoli, Piazza Miraglia, Naples, Italy.

Squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck (SCCHN) comprises a large group of
cancers in the oral cavity and nasopharyngeal area that typically arise in older 
males in association with alcohol/tobacco usage. Within the oral cavity, the
mobile tongue is the most common site for tumour development. The incidence of
tongue squamous cell carcinoma (TSCC) is increasing in younger people, which has 
been suggested to associate with a viral aetiology. Two common human oncogenic
viruses, human papilloma virus (HPV) and Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) are known
causes of certain types of SCCHN, namely the oropharynx and nasopharynx,
respectively. EBV infects most adults worldwide through oral transmission and
establishes a latent infection, with sporadic productive viral replication and
release of virus in the oral cavity throughout life. In view of the prevalence of
EBV in the oral cavity and recent data indicating that it infects tongue
epithelial cells and establishes latency, we examined 98 cases of primary
squamous cell carcinoma of the mobile tongue and 15 cases of tonsillar squamous
cell carcinoma for the presence of EBV-encoded RNAs (EBERs), EBV DNA and an
EBV-encoded protein, EBNA-1. A commercially available in situ hybridisation kit
targeting EBER transcripts (EBER-ISH) showed a positive signal in the cytoplasm
and/or nuclei of tumour cells in 43% of TSCCs. However, application of control
probes and RNase A digestion using in-house developed EBER-ISH showed identical
EBER staining patterns, indicating non-specific signals. PCR analysis of the
BamH1 W repeat sequences did not identify EBV genomes in tumour samples.
Immunohistochemistry for EBNA-1 was also negative. These data exclude EBV as a
potential player in TSCC in both old and young patients and highlight the
importance of appropriate controls for EBER-ISH in investigating EBV in human
diseases.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0184201 
PMCID: PMC5604943
PMID: 28926591  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
