

68. J Laryngol Otol. 2010 Jun;124(6):659-62. doi: 10.1017/S0022215110000617. Epub
2010 Apr 7.

Immunological responses against human papilloma virus and human papilloma virus
induced laryngeal cancer.

Chitose S(1), Sakazaki T, Ono T, Kurita T, Mihashi H, Nakashima T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Kurume University School
of Medicine, Kurume, Japan. yonekawa@med.kurume-u.ac.jp

OBJECTIVE: This study aimed to clarify the local immune status in the larynx in
the presence of infection or carcinogenesis associated with human papilloma
virus.
METHODS: Cytological samples (for human papilloma virus detection) and laryngeal 
secretions (for immunoglobulin assessment) were obtained from 31 patients with
laryngeal disease, during microscopic laryngeal surgery. On histological
examination, 12 patients had squamous cell carcinoma, four had laryngeal
papilloma and 15 had other benign laryngeal disease. Cytological samples were
tested for human papilloma virus DNA using the Hybrid Capture 2 assay.
RESULTS: High risk human papilloma virus DNA was detected in 25 per cent of
patients (three of 12) with laryngeal cancer. Low risk human papilloma virus DNA 
was detected only in three laryngeal papilloma patients. The mean laryngeal
secretion concentrations of immunoglobulins M, G and A and secretory
immunoglobulin A in human papilloma virus DNA positive patients were more than
twice those in human papilloma virus DNA negative patients. A statistically
significant difference was observed between the secretory immunoglobulin A
concentrations in the two groups. Patients with laryngeal cancer had higher
laryngeal secretion concentrations of each immunoglobulin type, compared with
patients with benign laryngeal disease. The study assessed the mean laryngeal
secretion concentrations of each immunoglobulin type in the 12 laryngeal cancer
patients, comparing human papilloma virus DNA positive patients (n = 3) and human
papilloma virus DNA negative patients (n = 9); the mean concentrations of
immunoglobulins M, G and A and secretory immunoglobulin A tended to be greater in
human papilloma virus DNA positive cancer patients, compared with human papilloma
virus DNA negative cancer patients.
CONCLUSION: These results suggest that the local laryngeal immune response is
activated by infection or carcinogenesis due to human papilloma virus. The
findings strongly suggest that secretory IgA has inhibitory activity against
infection or carcinogenesis associated with human papilloma virus in the larynx.

DOI: 10.1017/S0022215110000617 
PMID: 20370947  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
