

703. Am J Trop Med Hyg. 2016 Apr;94(4):840-3. doi: 10.4269/ajtmh.15-0803. Epub 2016
Feb 1.

Severe Cutaneous Leishmaniasis in a Human Immunodeficiency Virus Patient
Coinfected with Leishmania braziliensis and Its Endosymbiotic Virus.

Parmentier L(1), Cusini A(1), Müller N(1), Zangger H(1), Hartley MA(1), Desponds 
C(1), Castiglioni P(1), Dubach P(1), Ronet C(1), Beverley SM(1), Fasel N(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, University Hospital of Bern, Bern, Switzerland;
Department of Infectious Diseases, University Hospital of Bern, Bern,
Switzerland; Institute of Parasitology, Vetsuisse Faculty Berne, University of
Bern, Bern, Switzerland; Department of Biochemistry, University of Lausanne,
Lausanne, Switzerland; Department of Ear, Neck and Throat, Head and Neck Surgery,
University Hospital of Bern, Bern, Switzerland; Department of Molecular
Microbiology, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri.
(2)Department of Dermatology, University Hospital of Bern, Bern, Switzerland;
Department of Infectious Diseases, University Hospital of Bern, Bern,
Switzerland; Institute of Parasitology, Vetsuisse Faculty Berne, University of
Bern, Bern, Switzerland; Department of Biochemistry, University of Lausanne,
Lausanne, Switzerland; Department of Ear, Neck and Throat, Head and Neck Surgery,
University Hospital of Bern, Bern, Switzerland; Department of Molecular
Microbiology, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri
nicolas.fasel@unil.ch.

Leishmania parasites cause a broad range of disease, with cutaneous afflictions
being, by far, the most prevalent. Variations in disease severity and symptomatic
spectrum are mostly associated to parasite species. One risk factor for the
severity and emergence of leishmaniasis is immunosuppression, usually arising by 
coinfection of the patient with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV).
Interestingly, several species of Leishmania have been shown to bear an
endogenous cytoplasmic dsRNA virus (LRV) of the Totiviridae family, and recently 
we correlated the presence of LRV1 within Leishmania parasites to an exacerbation
murine leishmaniasis and with an elevated frequency of drug treatment failures in
humans. This raises the possibility of further exacerbation of leishmaniasis in
the presence of both viruses, and here we report a case of cutaneous
leishmaniasis caused by Leishmania braziliensis bearing LRV1 with aggressive
pathogenesis in an HIV patient. LRV1 was isolated and partially sequenced from
skin and nasal lesions. Genetic identity of both sequences reinforced the
assumption that nasal parasites originate from primary skin lesions.
Surprisingly, combined antiretroviral therapy did not impact the devolution of
Leishmania infection. The Leishmania infection was successfully treated through
administration of liposomal amphotericin B.

© The American Society of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene.

DOI: 10.4269/ajtmh.15-0803 
PMCID: PMC4824227
PMID: 26834198  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
