

720. J Virol. 2015 Sep;89(17):8957-66. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00592-15. Epub 2015 Jun 17.

Structural Analysis of the Roles of Influenza A Virus Membrane-Associated
Proteins in Assembly and Morphology.

Chlanda P(1), Schraidt O(1), Kummer S(2), Riches J(1), Oberwinkler H(2), Prinz
S(1), Kräusslich HG(2), Briggs JA(3).

Author information: 
(1)Structural and Computational Biology Unit, European Molecular Biology
Laboratory, Heidelberg, Germany.
(2)Department of Infectious Diseases, Virology, University Hospital Heidelberg,
Heidelberg, Germany.
(3)Structural and Computational Biology Unit, European Molecular Biology
Laboratory, Heidelberg, Germany john.briggs@embl.de.

The assembly of influenza A virus at the plasma membrane of infected cells leads 
to release of enveloped virions that are typically round in tissue
culture-adapted strains but filamentous in strains isolated from patients. The
viral proteins hemagglutinin (HA), neuraminidase (NA), matrix protein 1 (M1), and
M2 ion channel all contribute to virus assembly. When expressed individually or
in combination in cells, they can all, under certain conditions, mediate release 
of membrane-enveloped particles, but their relative roles in virus assembly,
release, and morphology remain unclear. To investigate these roles, we produced
membrane-enveloped particles by plasmid-derived expression of combinations of HA,
NA, and M proteins (M1 and M2) or by infection with influenza A virus. We
monitored particle release, particle morphology, and plasma membrane morphology
by using biochemical methods, electron microscopy, electron tomography, and
cryo-electron tomography. Our data suggest that HA, NA, or HANA (HA plus NA)
expression leads to particle release through nonspecific induction of membrane
curvature. In contrast, coexpression with the M proteins clusters the
glycoproteins into filamentous membrane protrusions, which can be released as
particles by formation of a constricted neck at the base. HA and NA are
preferentially distributed to differently curved membranes within these
particles. Both the budding intermediates and the released particles are
morphologically similar to those produced during infection with influenza A
virus. Together, our data provide new insights into influenza virus assembly and 
show that the M segment together with either of the glycoproteins is the minimal 
requirement to assemble and release membrane-enveloped particles that are truly
virus-like.IMPORTANCE: Influenza A virus is a major respiratory pathogen. It
assembles membrane-enveloped virus particles whose shapes vary from spherical to 
filamentous. Here we examine the roles of individual viral proteins in mediating 
virus assembly and determining virus shape. To do this, we used a range of
electron microscopy techniques to obtain and compare two- and three-dimensional
images of virus particles and virus-like particles during and after assembly. The
virus-like particles were produced using different combinations of viral
proteins. Among our results, we found that coexpression of one or both of the
viral surface proteins (hemagglutinin and neuraminidase) with the viral
membrane-associated proteins encoded by the M segment results in assembly and
release of filamentous virus-like particles in a manner very similar to that of
the budding and release of influenza virions. These data provide novel insights
into the roles played by individual viral proteins in influenza A virus assembly.

Copyright © 2015, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.00592-15 
PMCID: PMC4524094
PMID: 26085153  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
