

725. Gene Ther. 2015 Apr;22(4):297-304. doi: 10.1038/gt.2014.123. Epub 2015 Jan 15.

Sendai virus-mediated gene transfer of the c-myc suppressor far-upstream
element-binding protein-interacting repressor suppresses head and neck cancer.

Tanaka N(1), Araki K(1), Mizokami D(1), Miyagawa Y(1), Yamashita T(1), Tomifuji
M(1), Ueda Y(2), Inoue M(2), Matsushita K(3), Nomura F(3), Shimada H(4), Shiotani
A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology - Head and Neck Surgery, National Defense
Medical College, Saitama, Japan.
(2)Department of Gene Medicine, DNAVEC Corporation, Ibaraki, Japan.
(3)Department of Molecular Diagnosis and Division of Clinical Genetics and
Proteomics, Chiba University Graduate School of Medicine, Chiba, Japan.
(4)Department of Surgery, Toho University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.

Far-upstream element-binding protein-interacting repressor (FIR) is a
transcription factor that inhibits c-Myc expression and has been shown to have
antitumor effects in some malignancies. Here, we evaluated the antitumor effects 
of FIR using fusion gene-deleted Sendai virus (SeV/ΔF) as a nontransmissible
vector against head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC). Using in vitro and 
in vivo xenograft mouse models, we observed efficient expression of green
fluorescent protein (GFP) following transduction with the SeV/ΔF vector encoding 
GFP (GFP-SeV/ΔF) into HNSCC cells. In vitro and in vivo studies revealed that
administration of the FIR-encoded SeV/ΔF (FIR-SeV/ΔF) vector exerted significant 
antitumor effects, suppressed c-Myc expression and induced apoptosis in HNSCC.
Additionally, the antitumor effects of FIR or the expression of GFP following
administration of the FIR- or GFP-SeV/ΔF vector, respectively, were dependent on 
the multiplicity of infection or titer. Furthermore, the SeV/ΔF vector itself had
no cytotoxic effects. Therefore, the SeV/ΔF vector may be safe and useful for the
treatment of HNSCC, allowing for high-titer SeV/ΔF vector administration for
anticancer gene therapy. In addition, SeV/ΔF vector-mediated FIR gene therapy
demonstrated effective tumor suppression in HNSCC, suggesting that this therapy
may have the potential for clinical use as a novel strategy for HNSCC treatment.

DOI: 10.1038/gt.2014.123 
PMID: 25588744  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
