

751. Front Biosci (Elite Ed). 2016 Jan 1;8:15-28.

TLR4 down-regulation identifies high risk HPV infection and integration in head
and neck squamous cell carcinomas.

Pannone G(1), Bufo P(1), Pace M(1), Lepore S(2), Russo GM(1), Rubini C(3), Franco
R(4), Aquino G(4), Santoro A(5), Campisi G(6), Rodolico V(7), Bucci E(8), Ilardi 
G(9), Mascolo M(10), Merolla F(9), Lo Muzio L(11), Natalicchio I(12), Colella
G(13), Laurenzana I(2), Trino S(2), Leonardi R(14), Bucci P(15).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, Section of Pathological
Anatomy, University of Foggia, Foggia, Italy.
(2)Laboratory of Preclinical and Translational Research, IRCCS-CROB, Oncological 
Reference Centre of Basilicata, Rionero in Vulture (PZ), Italy.
(3)Section of Pathological Anatomy, Polytechnic University of Marche, Ancona,
Italy.
(4)Section of Pathological Anatomy, National Cancer Institute IRCCS 'G. Pascale' 
Foundation, Napoli, Italy.
(5)Department of Laboratory and Services, Section of Histopathology, Research and
Care Foundation Giovanni Paolo II, Catholic University of Sacred Heart (UCSC),
Campobasso, Italy, angelasantoro1@hotmail.it.
(6)Department of Surgical, Oncological and Stomatological Disciplines
(Di.Chir.On.S.), University of Palermo, Via del Vespro 129, 90127 Palermo, Italy.
(7)epartment of Sciences for the Promotion of the Maternal and Childhood Health
G. D'Alessandro, Section of Anatomic Pathology, University of Palermo, A.O.U.
Policlinico P. Giaccone, Palermo, Italy.
(8)epartment of Neurosciences and Reproductive and Odontostomatological Sciences,
University of Napoli Federico II, Napoli, Italy.
(9)Department of Advanced Biomedical Sciences, Pathology Section, University of
Naples "Federico II", Naples, Italy.
(10)Department of Advanced Biochemical Sciences, Section of Anatomic Pathology,
University of Napoli Federico II, Via S Pansini 5, Napoli, Italy.
(11)Department of Experimental and Clinical Medicine, Dental Clinic, University
of Foggia, Foggia, Italy.
(12)Section of Clinic Pathology, OO.RR., Foggia, Italy, 12Department of Head and 
Neck Surgery, Second University of Naples, Naples, Italy.
(13)Department of Head and Neck Surgery, Second University of Naples, Naples,
Italy.
(14)Department Medical-Surgical Specialties, Section of Oral Medicine,
Policlinico, University of Catania, Catania, Italy.
(15)Department of Neurosciences and Reproductive and Odontostomatological
Sciences, University of Napoli Federico II, Napoli, Italy.

TLRs are main actors of the innate immune response against HPV. There are very
few studies on the role of TLRs mediated HPV clearance in Head and Neck oncology.
Our aim was to evaluate whether TLR4 expression identifies HPV infection and/or
HR-HPV integration status in oral and oropharyngeal cancers. By
immunohistochemistry we assessed TLR4 levels in OSCC/OPSCC. To detect viral
integration or episomic status In situ hybridization for HPV-DNA and
Pyro-sequencing techniques have been performed. The relationship between TLR4
expression with HPV infection status has been investigated. ISH HPV positive
samples have reported lower levels of TLR4 intensity than negative samples (p =
.002). There was no statistical correlation between TLR4 intensity and PCR HPV
results (p more than 0.0.5). Point-biserial correlation coefficient revealed
significant association between TLR4 expression and HR-HPV integration status (p 
= .0001) and between TLR4 expression index and HR-HPV infection (p = .001). These
data have shown that TLR4 down-regulation is strongly associated to both HPV-16
infection and its integration into the host DNA.


PMID: 26709642  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
