

764. Cancer Sci. 2016 Oct;107(10):1373-1379. doi: 10.1111/cas.13027. Epub 2016 Sep 9.

Oncolytic virus therapy: A new era of cancer treatment at dawn.

Fukuhara H(1), Ino Y(2), Todo T(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Graduate School of Medicine, The University of Tokyo,
Tokyo, Japan.
(2)Division of Innovative Cancer Therapy, Institute of Medical Science, The
University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.
(3)Division of Innovative Cancer Therapy, Institute of Medical Science, The
University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan. toudou-nsu@umin.ac.jp.

Oncolytic virus therapy is perhaps the next major breakthrough in cancer
treatment following the success in immunotherapy using immune checkpoint
inhibitors. Oncolytic viruses are defined as genetically engineered or naturally 
occurring viruses that selectively replicate in and kill cancer cells without
harming the normal tissues. T-Vec (talimogene laherparepvec), a second-generation
oncolytic herpes simplex virus type 1 (HSV-1) armed with GM-CSF, was recently
approved as the first oncolytic virus drug in the USA and Europe. The phase III
trial proved that local intralesional injections with T-Vec in advanced malignant
melanoma patients can not only suppress the growth of injected tumors but also
act systemically and prolong overall survival. Other oncolytic viruses that are
closing in on drug approval in North America and Europe include vaccinia virus
JX-594 (pexastimogene devacirepvec) for hepatocellular carcinoma,
GM-CSF-expressing adenovirus CG0070 for bladder cancer, and Reolysin
(pelareorep), a wild-type variant of reovirus, for head and neck cancer. In
Japan, a phase II clinical trial of G47∆, a third-generation oncolytic HSV-1, is 
ongoing in glioblastoma patients. G47∆ was recently designated as a "Sakigake"
breakthrough therapy drug in Japan. This new system by the Japanese government
should provide G47∆ with priority reviews and a fast-track drug approval by the
regulatory authorities. Whereas numerous oncolytic viruses have been subjected to
clinical trials, the common feature that is expected to play a major role in
prolonging the survival of cancer patients is an induction of specific antitumor 
immunity in the course of tumor-specific viral replication. It appears that it
will not be long before oncolytic virus therapy becomes a standard therapeutic
option for all cancer patients.

© 2016 The Authors. Cancer Science published by John Wiley & Sons Australia, Ltd 
on behalf of Japanese Cancer Association.

DOI: 10.1111/cas.13027 
PMCID: PMC5084676
PMID: 27486853  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
