

776. J Med Virol. 2015 Aug;87(8):1258-67. doi: 10.1002/jmv.24165. Epub 2015 May 4.

Japanese encephalitis associated acute encephalitis syndrome cases in West
Bengal, India: A sero-molecular evaluation in relation to clinico-pathological
spectrum.

Sarkar A(1), Datta S(2), Pathak BK(3), Mukhopadhyay SK(4), Chatterjee S(1).

Author information: 
(1)ICMR Virus, ID & BG Hospital, Kolkata, West Bengal, India.
(2)IPGME&R, Kolkata, West Bengal, India.
(3)Department of Biotechnology, St. Xavier's College, Kolkata, West Bengal,
India.
(4)Department of Microbiology, The University of Burdwan, Golapbag, Burdwan, West
Bengal, India.

Japanese encephalitis (JE) is a major public health problem in Asia and worldwide
and it is responsible mainly for viral acute encephalitis syndrome (AES). The
sole etiologic agent of JE is Japanese encephalitis virus (JEV). Although JE/AES 
cases have been regarded traditionally as a disease of children, a growing number
of patients with JE/AES cases are also seen in the adult age group every year in 
the state of West Bengal, India in spite of vaccination. Therefore, a systematic 
study was performed to differentiate and characterize the clinico-pathological
parameters and viral diversity among the patients of different age groups. Viral 
diversity was also evaluated from the JE/AES cases, depending on their disease
severity. A total of 441 JE/AES cases were included in this study. By MAC-ELISA, 
111 samples were found JEV IgM positive and among the IgM negative cases, 26
samples were found RT-PCR positive against JEV infection. Neck rigidity, abnormal
behavior, convulsion, protein in CSF, WBC in CSF, and aspartate transaminase in
blood differed significantly among the patients of pediatric-adolescent and adult
group in both IgM positive and RT-PCR positive cases. Viral diversity was
increased significantly in the pediatric-adolescent group compared to adult
patients. Interestingly, with the rise in disease severity the viral diversity
was found to be increased among the patients, irrespective of their age
distribution. Based on clinico-pathological parameters and analysis of viral
diversity, it can be concluded that viral diversity which occurs naturally is
likely to affect disease severity, especially in the patients of
pediatric-adolescent group.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/jmv.24165 
PMID: 25939919  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
