

777. J Voice. 2015 Sep;29(5):600-2. doi: 10.1016/j.jvoice.2014.10.010. Epub 2015 Apr
11.

Atypical Presentation of a Common Disease: Shingles of the Larynx.

Hosseini S(1), Zawawi F(2), Young J(3).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Medicine, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada. Electronic
address: sarah.f.hosseini@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Otolaryngology - Head and Neck Surgery, McGill University,
Montreal, Quebec, Canada; Department of Otolaryngology, King Abdulaziz
University, Jeddah, Saudi Arabia.
(3)Department of Otolaryngology - Head and Neck Surgery, McGill University,
Montreal, Quebec, Canada.

OBJECTIVE: Herpes zoster is a neurocutaneous disease resulting from the
reactivation of endogenous varicella-zoster virus (VZV) in dorsal sensory or
cranial nerve ganglia. Rarely, this infection manifests without the
characteristic dermatomal rash, a condition termed zoster sine herpete. Viral
spreading of herpes zoster in the head and neck may manifest as various signs and
symptoms because of the multiple possible combinations of cranial neuropathies.
With only six cases reported in the English literature up to now, isolated
neuropathies of the vagus nerve in the absence of cutaneous lesions tend to be
misdiagnosed as idiopathic laryngeal paralysis.
METHODS: We report a case of herpes zoster of the larynx in an 80-year-old man
presenting with sore throat, dysphagia, and hoarseness.
RESULTS: Endoscopic examination revealed unilateral vocal fold paralysis, pooling
of secretions, and mucosal vesicles of the hemilarynx. After the diagnosis of VZV
infection with polymerase chain reaction (PCR) testing, the patient was treated
with valacyclovir and corticosteroids, leading to complete recovery after 2
months.
CONCLUSIONS: Herpes zoster of the larynx is an uncommon condition that should be 
included in the differential diagnosis of laryngeal paralysis of idiopathic
cause. We recommend performing a thorough examination of the pharyngolaryngeal
structures and ordering PCR testing as the diagnostic method of choice.

Copyright © 2015 The Voice Foundation. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights
reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jvoice.2014.10.010 
PMID: 25873549  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
