A 34-year old male patient was admitted with chief complaint of fever for 9 days, orbital pain and itching rash for 4 days on February 6th, 2016. (1) Epidemiological characteristics: the patient was bitted by mosquitoes during his business trip in Venezuela since January 1st, where Zika virus disease was spreading. On January 20th he had dizziness without fever, and the symptom disappeared after taking medicines without details. Paroxysmal dizziness, chills and mild fever without myalgia was experienced on January 28th. On February 3rd small red rash appeared in the neck, spreading to anterior part of chest, limbs and trunk, and the fever, fatigue, nausea was continued, and a new symptom of paroxysmal pain in back of ears and orbits appeared, during which he had not go to hospital. The symptoms relieved on February 4th. He returned to Ganxian County on February 5th, he had yellow stool 3 times with normal temperature, without abdominal pain, and red rash still appeared in the neck. He went to Ganxian People's Hospital on February 6th, 2016. (2) Clinical manifestation: the vital signs showed a temperature of 36.8?centigrade, a pulse rate of 80 bpm, a respiratory rate of 20 bpm, and a blood pressure of 110/70 mmHg (1 mmHg = 0.133 kPa). It was showed by physical examination that red rash appeared in the neck, and no superficial enlarged lymph nodes were found. Bilateral conjunctival congestion was obvious, physiological reflex existed and pathological reflex was not found. (3) Auxiliary lab test and examination: no abnormal finding were revealed throughout examination and laboratory tests, including routine blood test, liver function, renal function, serum myocardial enzyme, electrolyte, blood sugar, C-reactive protein (CRP), troponin I (TnI), and procalcitonin (PCT), except slight prolongation in activated partial thromboplastin time (APTT, 38.6 s) on February 6th; and slightly dense shadow in left lung in lung CT scan, considering inflammatory changes and slight emphysema (especially in the left lower lung) as well as bilateral renal calculus on February 8th. No significant abnormalities were found in electrocardiogram and B ultrasound test of liver, spleen, and pancreas. (4) Virus confirmation: Zika virus nucleic acid was positive reported by Jiangxi Province Center for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) on February 7th and Chinese CDC on February 9th, respectively, though Dengue virus were negative reported by Ganzhou CDC on February 6th. Right after the first diagnosis, anyone who had been in close contact with the patient received medical monitoring. (5)Treatment process: on February 6th, symptomatic treatment was prescribed since admitted into the infectious isolation wards and daily intravenous drip of Xiyanping injection 250 mg was prescribed for antiviral therapy. On February 7th, the patient had no fever, with occasional chills, neck rash was disappeared, orbital pain relieved and bilateral conjunctival hyperemia range was paler and narrowed, and his condition improved. Ibuprofen was administered for defervesce 3 times a day when his temperature reached to 37.5?centigrade at 16:00. On February 8th, the patient had no fever, times of chills was significantly reduced, without myalgia and rash, orbital pain and conjunctival hyperemia further recovered. On February 9th, bilateral eyes slightly tingling, mild conjunctival congestion, no fever chills or other discomfort was found. The chloramphenicol eye drops was prescribed for relieving sting pain with conjunctival congestion twice a day as recombinant human interferon alpha eye drops was out of store. The patient was comfortable from February 11th to February 13th. Blood and urine test for Zika were reported negative by the Chinese CDC and Jiangxi Province CDC. Because all the discharge criteria were satisfied, the patient was discharged on February 14th.