

783. PLoS One. 2009;4(3):e4941. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0004941. Epub 2009 Mar 18.

Genome-wide hypomethylation in head and neck cancer is more pronounced in
HPV-negative tumors and is associated with genomic instability.

Richards KL(1), Zhang B, Baggerly KA, Colella S, Lang JC, Schuller DE, Krahe R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston, TX, USA.

Loss of genome-wide methylation is a common feature of cancer, and the degree of 
hypomethylation has been correlated with genomic instability. Global methylation 
of repetitive elements possibly arose as a defense mechanism against parasitic
DNA elements, including retrotransposons and viral pathogens. Given the
alterations of global methylation in both viral infection and cancer, we examined
genome-wide methylation levels in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC), 
a cancer causally associated with human papilloma virus (HPV). We assayed global 
hypomethylation levels in 26 HNSCC samples, compared with their matched normal
adjacent tissue, using Pyrosequencing-based methylation assays for LINE repeats. 
In addition, we examined cell lines derived from a variety of solid tumors for
LINE and SINE (Alu) repeats. The degree of LINE and Alu hypomethylation varied
among different cancer cell lines. There was only moderate correlation between
LINE and Alu methylation levels, with the range of variation in methylation
levels being greater for the LINE elements. LINE hypomethylation was more
pronounced in HPV-negative than in HPV-positive tumors. Moreover, genomic
instability, as measured by genome-wide loss-of-heterozygosity (LOH) single
nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) analysis, was greater in HNSCC samples with more
pronounced LINE hypomethylation. Global hypomethylation was variable in HNSCC.
Its correlation with both HPV status and degree of LOH as a surrogate for genomic
instability may reflect alternative oncogenic pathways in HPV-positive versus
HPV-negative tumors.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0004941 
PMCID: PMC2654169
PMID: 19293934  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
