

793. Heart Lung. 2011 Mar-Apr;40(2):164-7. doi: 10.1016/j.hrtlng.2010.05.059. Epub
2010 Dec 8.

Facial herpes zoster complicated by varicella zoster virus (VZV) encephalitis:
The diagnostic significance of atypical lymphocytes in cerebrospinal fluid (CSF).

Cunha BA(1), Strollo S, Durie N, Ibrahim MS.

Author information: 
(1)Infectious Disease Division, Winthrop-University Hospital, Mineola, New York
11501, USA.

BACKGROUND: In general, viral infections of the central nervous system (CNS)
manifest as encephalitis and, less commonly, as meningoencephalitis or aseptic
meningitis. Varicella zoster virus (VZV) is an uncommon cause of encephalitis.
METHODS: Herpes zoster (shingles) is a cutaneous reactivation of previous
chickenpox infection due to VZV. Herpes zoster may be dermatomal (ie, <3
dermatomes) or disseminated (ie, >3 dermatomes). Decreased cell-mediated immunity
from stress, steroids, or immunosuppressive drugs often precede
dermatomal/disseminated herpes zoster. With herpes zoster, the closer the
dermatomal involvement is to the CNS (ie, head/neck shingles), the more likely a 
patient will have symptomatic CNS involvement (eg, encephalitis). Except for the 
association of the herpes zoster rash and the simultaneous/subsequent
encephalitis, there are few clinical features that distinguish VZV encephalitis
from that due to other viruses. The cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) profile of VZV
encephalitis is usually clinically indistinguishable from that due to of other
causes of viral encephalitis. In VZV meningoencephalitis or encephalitis, the CSF
typically shows a modest lymphocytic pleocytosis with normal CSF glucose levels, 
variably elevated CSF protein levels, and normal CSF lactic acid levels. Atypical
lymphocytes are rare in the CSF with VZV encephalitis.
RESULTS: We present the case of a 75-year-old woman who developed VZV
encephalitis after having herpes zoster on her forehead. Except for facial herpes
zoster, there were no clinically distinguishing features to determine the cause
of her encephalitis. Her CSF had 800 white blood cells/high power field with 26% 
lymphocytes (17% atypical lymphocytes). The patient's CSF glucose and CSF lactate
dehydrogenase levels were normal, and her CSF protein was elevated. The CSF
lactic acid was minimally elevated secondary to red blood cells in the CSF.
Electroencephalogram showed general background slowing bilaterally, typical of
viral encephalitis. The absence of unilateral focal frontotemporal/parietal lobe 
focus on electroencephalogram argued against the diagnosis of herpes simplex
encephalitis. CSF atypical lymphocytes provided the key clue to the etiology of
her encephalitis. CSF atypical lymphocytes are not uncommon in Epstein-Barr virus
or cytomegalovirus encephalitis. Less commonly, atypical lymphocytes may be
present in the CSF with enteroviruses, West Nile encephalitis, and Japanese
encephalitis. VZV is a rare cause of atypical lymphocytes in the CSF but was the 
clue to the diagnosis before CSF polymerase chain reaction results for VZV were
available. Her CSF polymerase chain reaction was negative for Mycobacterium
tuberculosis, herpes simplex virus, human herpesvirus-6, cytomegalovirus,
enteroviruses, and West Nile virus, but was positive for VZV. She made an
uneventful recovery with acyclovir.
CONCLUSION: CSF atypical lymphocytes, if present, are an important diagnostic
clue in some causes of viral encephalitis. The most common cause of nonseasonal
viral encephalitis is herpes simplex virus, which is not associated with
CSF atypical lymphocytes. Patients with Epstein-Barr virus, cytomegalovirus, West
Nile encephalitis, and enteroviruses usually have extra-CNS signs and symptoms
which should suggest the cause of the patient's encephalitis. CSF atypical
lymphocytes limit the differential diagnostic possibilities in patients with
viral encephalitis and may be the key clue to the diagnosis, as in the case
presented.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.hrtlng.2010.05.059 
PMID: 21144586  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
