

794. Anticancer Res. 2016 Dec;36(12):6667-6672.

Impact of Induction Chemotherapy in Locally Advanced HPV-negative Oropharyngeal
Cancer. A Propensity Score-matched analysis.

DE Felice F(1), Abate G(2), Galdieri A(2), Bulzonetti N(2), Musio D(2), Tombolini
V(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiotherapy, Policlinico Umberto I, Sapienza University of
Rome, Rome, Italy fradefelice@hotmail.it.
(2)Department of Radiotherapy, Policlinico Umberto I, Sapienza University of
Rome, Rome, Italy.
(3)Spencer-Lorillard Foundation, Rome, Italy.

AIM: To estimate the clinical outcomes of induction chemotherapy (IC) followed by
standard chemoradiotherapy (CRT) and CRT alone in patients with locally advanced 
human papilloma virus (HPV)-negative oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Consecutive patients with histologically-proven
HPV-negative squamous cell carcinoma of the oropharynx were included and treated 
with IC-CRT or CRT alone. In order to compare treatment outcomes and toxicity
between groups, patients were matched by primary tumor site and clinical disease 
stage. Overall survival (OS), disease-free survival (DFS) and metastasis-free
survival (MFS) curves were calculated with the Kaplan-Meier method.
RESULTS: Nine IC patients and 18 CRT patients were included. All patients
completed the programmed treatment. The median follow-up was 38 months. There
were no statistically significant differences in OS and DFS between groups. The
5-year MFS was 88.9% and 50.8% in the IC-CRT group, respectively. There was no
meaningful difference in toxicity between patients.
CONCLUSION: In HPV-negative patients with locally advanced oropharyngeal cancer, 
adding IC to standard CRT may increase the MFS rate. However no significant
differences in OS and DFS were observed. More studies are needed to better
elucidate the role of IC in this setting.

Copyright© 2016 International Institute of Anticancer Research (Dr. John G.
Delinassios), All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.21873/anticanres.11276 
PMID: 27920000  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
