

799. PLoS Pathog. 2012;8(12):e1003056. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1003056. Epub 2012
Dec 6.

Three-dimensional architecture and biogenesis of membrane structures associated
with hepatitis C virus replication.

Romero-Brey I(1), Merz A, Chiramel A, Lee JY, Chlanda P, Haselman U,
Santarella-Mellwig R, Habermann A, Hoppe S, Kallis S, Walther P, Antony C,
Krijnse-Locker J, Bartenschlager R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases, Molecular Virology, University of
Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany.

All positive strand RNA viruses are known to replicate their genomes in close
association with intracellular membranes. In case of the hepatitis C virus (HCV),
a member of the family Flaviviridae, infected cells contain accumulations of
vesicles forming a membranous web (MW) that is thought to be the site of viral
RNA replication. However, little is known about the biogenesis and
three-dimensional structure of the MW. In this study we used a combination of
immunofluorescence- and electron microscopy (EM)-based methods to analyze the
membranous structures induced by HCV in infected cells. We found that the MW is
derived primarily from the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) and contains markers of
rough ER as well as markers of early and late endosomes, COP vesicles,
mitochondria and lipid droplets (LDs). The main constituents of the MW are single
and double membrane vesicles (DMVs). The latter predominate and the kinetic of
their appearance correlates with kinetics of viral RNA replication. DMVs are
induced primarily by NS5A whereas NS4B induces single membrane vesicles arguing
that MW formation requires the concerted action of several HCV replicase
proteins. Three-dimensional reconstructions identify DMVs as protrusions from the
ER membrane into the cytosol, frequently connected to the ER membrane via a
neck-like structure. In addition, late in infection multi-membrane vesicles
become evident, presumably as a result of a stress-induced reaction. Thus, the
morphology of the membranous rearrangements induced in HCV-infected cells
resemble those of the unrelated picorna-, corona- and arteriviruses, but are
clearly distinct from those of the closely related flaviviruses. These results
reveal unexpected similarities between HCV and distantly related positive-strand 
RNA viruses presumably reflecting similarities in cellular pathways exploited by 
these viruses to establish their membranous replication factories.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1003056 
PMCID: PMC3516559
PMID: 23236278  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
