

81. Int J Pediatr Otorhinolaryngol. 2015 Mar;79(3):423-7. doi:
10.1016/j.ijporl.2015.01.007. Epub 2015 Jan 15.

Detection of the Epstein-Barr virus, Human Bocavirus and novel KI and KU
polyomaviruses in adenotonsillar tissues.

Günel C(1), Kırdar S(2), Ömürlü İK(3), Ağdaş F(4).

Author information: 
(1)Adnan Menderes Üniversity Faculty of Medicine, Department of
Otorhinolaryngology Head and Neck Surgery, Aydın, Turkey. Electronic address:
drgunel@hotmail.com.
(2)Adnan Menderes Üniversity, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical
Microbiology, Aydın, Turkey. Electronic address: sevin.kirdar@gmail.com.
(3)Adnan Menderes Üniversity, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Bioistatistic,
Aydın, Turkey. Electronic address: imran.omurlu@adu.edu.tr.
(4)Adnan Menderes Üniversity Faculty of Medicine, Department of
Otorhinolaryngology Head and Neck Surgery, Aydın, Turkey. Electronic address:
dr.fagdas@gmail.com.

OBJECTIVES: We aimed to investigate the seasonal disturbations and the rates of
detection of Epstein-Barr virus (EBV), Human Bocavirus (HBoV), and polyomaviruses
KI and WU (KIPyV and WUPyV) in adenoid and tonsil tissues during the absence of
acute infection symptoms.
STUDY DESIGN: Cross-sectional prospective study.
SETTING: Tertiary hospital.
METHODS: DNA expressions of EBV, HBoV, polyomaviruses KIPyV and WUPyV were
investigated in children with chronic tonsillar and adenoidal diseases using
real-time polymerase chain reaction. The patients were grouped as follows:
adenoid, recurrent tonsillitis and hypertrophic tonsillitis group. The
relationships of the expressions of these viruses with age, gender, recurrent
infection and airway obstruction were also analyzed. Seasonal variations in rates
of detection of these viruses in adenoid and tonsil tissues were also
investigated.
RESULTS: Considering adenoid specimens, HBoV was found to be the most frequent
virus with the rate of 43.1%. In specimens of recurrent tonsillitis and
hypertrophic tonsils, EBV was the most frequently encountered virus (53.8%, and
32.0%, respectively). In children with hypertrophic adenoids, while HBoV was
detected to be positive throughout the year, EBV was present throughout the year 
in children with recurrent tonsillitis.
CONCLUSIONS: The detection of HBoV and EBV throughout the year in samples of
children with asymptomatic chronic adenotonsillar diseases may indicate that
these viruses may remain persistently in lymphoepithelial tissues of upper
respiratory tract. Virus persistence may have a pathogenetic potential for
development of lymphoid hypertrophy and a chronic stimulatory effect for
inflammation.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijporl.2015.01.007 
PMID: 25631935  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
