
Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.


83. Oncotarget. 2014 Jun 30;5(12):3956-69.

An updated overview of HPV-associated head and neck carcinomas.

Zaravinos A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Medicine Research Center and Laboratory of Molecular and Medical
Genetics, Department of Biological Sciences, University of Cyprus, 1678 Nicosia, 
Cyprus. Division of Clinical Immunology and Transfusion Medicine, Department of
Laboratory Medicine, Karolinska Institutet, 14145 Huddinge, Sweden.

Human papilloma virus (HPV)-associated head and neck carcinoma is quite
heterogeneous and most of the tumors arise in the oral cavity, oropharynx,
hypopharynx and larynx. HPV was just recently recognized as an emerging risk
factor for oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC). HPV(+) tumors represent 
5-20% of all head and neck squamous-cell carcinomas (HNSCCs) and 40-90% of those 
arising from the oropharynx, with widely variable rates depending on the
geographic area, population, relative prevalence of environment-related SCC and
detection assay. Different carcinogenic mechanisms are most likely implicated in 
cervical and oropharyngeal carcinogenesis. The most certain carcinogenic genotype
for the head and neck region and the most common high-risk HPV genotype, HPV-16, 
is frequently detected in OSCC. A combination of p16INK4A expression and
molecular detection of HPV DNA is the gold standard for the viral identification 
in tissue and exfoliated cell samples. Differences in the biology of HPV(+) and
HPV(-) OSCC may have implications for the management of patients. New
immunotherapy drugs based on the release of the co-inhibitory receptors,
cytotoxic T-lymphocyte-associated antigen 4 (CTLA-4) and programmed-death 1
(PD-1) have currently emerged. The goal of therapeutic cancer vaccination is
inculcation of a persistent, tumor antigen-specific T cell response which kills
tumor cells. The efficacy of the current HPV vaccines, Cervarix and Gardasil, in 
preventing HPV-related HNSCC is at present unknown. Treatment de-escalation is
recommended as the current management of HPV-induced HNSCCs.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.1934 
PMCID: PMC4147298
PMID: 24970795  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
