

832. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2014 Nov 13;8(11):e3233. doi: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0003233.
eCollection 2014.

Clinical features and patient management of Lujo hemorrhagic fever.

Sewlall NH(1), Richards G(2), Duse A(2), Swanepoel R(3), Paweska J(4), Blumberg
L(4), Dinh TH(5), Bausch D(6).

Author information: 
(1)Internal Medicine, Morningside MediClinic, Johannesburg, South Africa;
Department of Medicine, University of the Witwatersrand, Johannesburg, South
Africa.
(2)Department of Medicine, University of the Witwatersrand, Johannesburg, South
Africa.
(3)Department of Medicine, University of Pretoria, Pretoria, South Africa.
(4)National Institute of Communicable Disease, Sandringham, South Africa.
(5)Centers for Disease control and Prevention, Atlanta, Georgia, United States of
America.
(6)Tulane School of Public Health and Tropical Medicine, New Orleans, Louisiana, 
United States of America.

BACKGROUND: In 2008 a nosocomial outbreak of five cases of viral hemorrhagic
fever due to a novel arenavirus, Lujo virus, occurred in Johannesburg, South
Africa. Lujo virus is only the second pathogenic arenavirus, after Lassa virus,
to be recognized in Africa and the first in over 40 years. Because of the remote,
resource-poor, and often politically unstable regions where Lassa fever and other
viral hemorrhagic fevers typically occur, there have been few opportunities to
undertake in-depth study of their clinical manifestations, transmission dynamics,
pathogenesis, or response to treatment options typically available in
industrialized countries.
METHODS AND FINDINGS: We describe the clinical features of five cases of Lujo
hemorrhagic fever and summarize their clinical management, as well as providing
additional epidemiologic detail regarding the 2008 outbreak. Illness typically
began with the abrupt onset of fever, malaise, headache, and myalgias followed
successively by sore throat, chest pain, gastrointestinal symptoms, rash, minor
hemorrhage, subconjunctival injection, and neck and facial swelling over the
first week of illness. No major hemorrhage was noted. Neurological signs were
sometimes seen in the late stages. Shock and multi-organ system failure, often
with evidence of disseminated intravascular coagulopathy, ensued in the second
week, with death in four of the five cases. Distinctive treatment components of
the one surviving patient included rapid commencement of the antiviral drug
ribavirin and administration of HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors (statins),
N-acetylcysteine, and recombinant factor VIIa.
CONCLUSIONS: Lujo virus causes a clinical syndrome remarkably similar to Lassa
fever. Considering the high case-fatality and significant logistical impediments 
to controlled treatment efficacy trials for viral hemorrhagic fever, it is both
logical and ethical to explore the use of the various compounds used in the
treatment of the surviving case reported here in future outbreaks. Clinical
observations should be systematically recorded to facilitate objective evaluation
of treatment efficacy. Due to the risk of secondary transmission, viral
hemorrhagic fever precautions should be implemented for all cases of Lujo virus
infection, with specialized precautions to protect against aerosols when
performing enhanced-risk procedures such as endotracheal intubation.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0003233 
PMCID: PMC4230886
PMID: 25393244  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
