

838. Rinsho Byori. 2013 Aug;61(8):679-84.

[An autopsy case of B lymphoblastic leukemia/lymphoma with hemophagocytic
syndrome infiltrating in the central nervous systems].

[Article in Japanese]

Fujii T(1), Shimada K, Tanaka S, Tanaka H, Amano I, Kimura H, Konishi N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Nara Medical University School of Medicine, Kashihara
634-8521, Japan.

The hemophagocytic syndrome(HPS) after the hematopoietic stem cell
transplantation(SHCT) may be triggered by the reactivation of virus such as
Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) or cytomegalovirus (CMV) under immunosuppressive state. 
The present case was a 17-year old man who was diagnosed as B lymphoblastic
leukemia. Bone marrow aspiration showed 96.4% of lymphoblasts with positive for
CD19 and CD20, negative for CD66 and POX, and dot staining for PAS. E2A/PBX1
chimeric mRNA was positive as assessed by RT-PCR method. He received three
courses of induction chemotherapy followed by allo-bone marrow transplantation
(BMT) from his sister, but had a relapse three months after allo-BMT. He received
allo peripheral blood-SCT (PBSCT) from his mother. The hematopoietic cells
successfully engrafted, but the mixed chimerism of 2 donors persisted. On day
149, he had a fever, and hemophagocytosis was found by bone marrow aspiration.
EBV genomic DNA was detected for 1.62 x 10(3) copies. CMV and fungus were
negative in blood. On day 165, the patient had been observed disturbance of
consciousness, neck stiffness, and died on day 170 due to multiple organ failure.
Autopsy examination showed infiltration of CD20+ leukemic cells into the
perivascular space of cerebrum, brainstem and spinal cord, with hemophagocytosis 
by CD6+ macrophages. In situ hybridization of EB-virus encoded small RNA (EBER)
confirmed EBV infection of B-lymphoblastic cells infiltrated in the cerebrum. HPS
was considered to be triggered by the reactivation of EBV, due to hematopoietic
dysfunction based on long-term immunosuppressive treatment and mixed chimerism
derived from a HSCT from 2 donors.


PMID: 24218764  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
