

87. Laryngoscope. 2015 Nov;125(11):2498-502. doi: 10.1002/lary.25470. Epub 2015 Jul
7.

Mycobacterial cervicofacial lymphadenitis in human immunodeficiency
virus-infected individuals after antiretroviral therapy initiation.

Ablanedo-Terrazas Y(1), Alvarado-de la Barrera C(1), Ruiz-Cruz M(1), Reyes-Terán 
G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Infectious Diseases Research Center, National Institute of Respiratory
Diseases, Mexico City, Mexico.

OBJECTIVES/HYPOTHESIS: Mycobacterial infections are the leading cause of
morbidity and mortality among human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)-infected
individuals worldwide. Cervical lymph nodes are the most frequently affected
extrapulmonary sites. Despite the substantial reduction in complications of
HIV-tuberculosis coinfection, a proportion of individuals develop immune
reconstitution inflammatory syndrome (IRIS), a term used for a clinical
deterioration following initiation of antiretroviral therapy (ART). The objective
of this study was to describe mycobacterial-associated IRIS in cervical lymph
nodes of HIV-infected individuals receiving ART.
STUDY DESIGN: Retrospective cohort study, set in a tertiary referral center in
Mexico City.
METHODS: We included ART-naive subjects who had at least one follow-up ear, nose,
and throat examination, and were diagnosed with lymph node mycobacterial
infection before or during the first 3 months of ART initiation.
Mycobacterial-associated IRIS in cervical lymph nodes was determined
retrospectively through clinical case definition and medical chart review.
RESULTS: Thirty-three subjects who initiated ART were diagnosed with cervical
lymph node mycobacteriosis; 24 had Mycobacterium tuberculosis infection and nine 
had nontuberculous disease.
CONCLUSIONS: M. tuberculosis was the most common pathogen isolated from cervical 
lymph nodes. The only factor associated with IRIS was infection with a
nontuberculous mycobacteria. The unexpectedly high incidence of
mycobacterial-associated IRIS underlines the relevance of head and neck
examination before ART initiation.
LEVEL OF EVIDENCE: 4.

© 2015 The American Laryngological, Rhinological and Otological Society, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/lary.25470 
PMID: 26152748  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
