

88. J Obstet Gynaecol Res. 2018 Jun;44(6):989-997. doi: 10.1111/jog.13634. Epub 2018 
Mar 8.

Global human papilloma virus vaccine implementation: An update.

Sabeena S(1), Bhat PV(2), Kamath V(3), Arunkumar G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Manipal Centre for Virus Research, Manipal Academy of Higher Education,
Manipal, Karnataka, India.
(2)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Dr TMA Pai Hospital, MMMC, Manipal
Academy of Higher Education, Manipal, Karnataka, India.
(3)Department of Community Medicine, Kasturba Medical College, Manipal Academy of
Higher Education, Manipal, Karnataka, India.

Human papillomavirus (HPV) infections continue to be one of the most common
sexually transmitted infections worldwide. The oncogenic potential of this virus 
was well established in anogenital malignancies and oropharyngeal cancers. Even
though a fall in cervical cancer rates has been reported worldwide, the
subsequent rise in HPV-associated head and neck cancers among men and women have 
been reported from developed countries, necessitating the vaccination of
adolescent boys as well. The objective of this narrative review is to provide an 
update on the current status of HPV vaccination worldwide. This will be helpful
for clinicians in counseling parents and guardians as this vaccine mainly targets
sexually naïve preadolescents. An electronic search of the databases was carried 
out to retrieve information concerning HPV vaccine implementation between July
2006 and 2017, with special emphasis on the current viewpoints, controversies and
ethical issues. Globally, 74 countries have implemented the HPV vaccine in the
national immunization schedule, and this vaccine is listed as an essential
medicine by WHO. About 60% of the low- and lower-middle-income countries have
implemented the vaccine with financial assistance from Gavi and WHO. The HPV
vaccine is a safe vaccine with no serious adverse effects as per the data
available from developed nations as well as low/lower middle/upper middle-income 
countries. However, long-term follow-up is essential to substantiate the impact
of the vaccination programs in cancer prevention.

© 2018 Japan Society of Obstetrics and Gynecology.

DOI: 10.1111/jog.13634 
PMID: 29517117  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
