

889. Pediatrics. 2010 Apr;125(4):e787-92. doi: 10.1542/peds.2009-1488. Epub 2010 Mar
1.

Generalized petechial rashes in children during a parvovirus B19 outbreak.

Edmonson MB(1), Riedesel EL, Williams GP, Demuri GP.

Author information: 
(1)Division of General Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, Department of
Pediatrics, University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and Public Health,
Madison, Wisconsin, USA. edmonson@pediatrics.wisc.edu

OBJECTIVES: Human parvovirus B19 infection is associated not only with erythema
infectiosum (fifth disease) but also, rarely, with purpuric or petechial rashes. 
Most reports of these atypical rashes describe sporadic cases with skin lesions
that have distinctively focal distributions. During a community outbreak of fifth
disease, we investigated a cluster of illnesses in children with generalized
petechial rashes to determine whether parvovirus was the causative agent and, if 
so, to describe more fully the clinical spectrum of petechial rashes that are
associated with this virus.
METHODS: Systematic evaluation was conducted by general pediatricians of children
with petechial rashes for evidence of acute parvovirus infection.
RESULTS: During the outbreak, acute parvovirus infection was confirmed in 13
(76%) of 17 children who were evaluated for petechial rash. Confirmed case
patients typically had mild constitutional symptoms, and most (11 [85%] of 13)
had fever. Petechiae were typically dense and widely distributed; sometimes
accentuated in the distal extremities, axillae, or groin; and usually absent from
the head/neck. Most case patients had leukopenia, and several had
thrombocytopenia. Parvovirus immunoglobulin M was detected in 8 (73%) of 11
acute-phase serum specimens, and immunoglobulin G was detectable only in
convalescent specimens. Parvovirus DNA was detected in all 7 tested serum
specimens, including 2 acute-phase specimens that were immunoglobulin M-negative.
All case patients had brief, uncomplicated illnesses, but 6 were briefly
hospitalized and 1 underwent a bone marrow examination. Two case patients
developed erythema infectiosum during convalescence.
CONCLUSIONS: During an outbreak of fifth disease, parvovirus proved to be a
common cause of petechial rash in children, and this rash was typically more
generalized than described in case reports. Associated clinical features,
hematologic abnormalities, and serologic test results are consistent with a
viremia-associated illness that is distinct from and occasionally followed by
erythema infectiosum.

DOI: 10.1542/peds.2009-1488 
PMID: 20194277  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
