

890. Int J Clin Oncol. 2016 Oct;21(5):819-826. Epub 2016 Jun 23.

The molecular mechanism of human papillomavirus-induced carcinogenesis in head
and neck squamous cell carcinoma.

Sano D(1), Oridate N(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, Yokohama City
University, School of Medicine, 3-9 Fukuura, Kanazawa-ku, Yokohama, 236-0004,
Japan. dsano@yokohama-cu.ac.jp.
(2)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, Yokohama City
University, School of Medicine, 3-9 Fukuura, Kanazawa-ku, Yokohama, 236-0004,
Japan.

Head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) is the sixth most common cancer
worldwide. Recently, the incidence of oropharyngeal cancer (OPC) has increased
markedly in comparison to that of HNSCC, which is associated with the use of
tobacco or alcohol or both. This increase has resulted mainly from the global
rise in the number of human papillomavirus (HPV)-related oropharyngeal cancers
(HPV-OPCs). HPV-OPC has several unique characteristics, including presentation in
younger patients, better response rates to treatment, and better prognosis
compared to alcohol- and smoking-related HNSCC. HPV infection status is now an
independent prognostic factor for survival in patients with OPC. In general, HPV 
oncoproteins E6 and E7 are the primary viral factors responsible for the
initiation and progression of HPV-related cancers via the inactivation of p53 and
pRb. However, alterations in additional factors, including genomic instability,
HPV DNA integration, and epigenetic alterations, could be equally important for
neoplastic transformation and tumor progression. The impact of genomic
instability and external environmental factors on the initiation of cervical
cancer development through high-risk HPV infection has been well characterized,
although less is known about the mechanism underlying HPV-induced carcinogenesis 
in HNSCC. This review provides an overview of the biology and molecular
mechanisms of HPV-related cancers, including a particular focus on several recent
studies on the comprehensive characterization of genomic alterations in
HPV-associated HNSCC.

DOI: 10.1007/s10147-016-1005-x 
PMID: 27339270  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
