

91. JAMA Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2017 Jan 1;143(1):81-84. doi:
10.1001/jamaoto.2016.3427.

Zika Virus-What the Otolaryngologist Should Know: A Review.

Arnaoutakis D(1), Padhya T(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, University of Texas
Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas.
(2)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, University of South
Florida College of Medicine, Tampa.

Comment in
    JAMA Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2017 Jan 1;143(1):84-85.

Importance: Initially discovered in 1947, Zika virus infection received little
notoriety as a tropical disease until 2015 when an outbreak of microcephaly cases
was reported in Brazil. Zika is a single-stranded RNA arbovirus of the
Flaviviridae family. The primary source of infection in humans stems from Aedes
aegypti mosquito bites but can also occur through sexual, blood, and perinatal
transmission. With expectations that 3 to 4 million people across the Americas
will be infected over the next year, the World Health Organization has declared
this event a Public Health Emergency of International Concern.
Observations: Although acute Zika virus infection is typically mild and
self-limited, researchers have demonstrated serious neurologic complications
associated with it such as microcephaly and Guillain-Barre syndrome.
Otolaryngologists should be aware of head and neck manifestations which include
conjunctivitis, retro-orbital pain, cephalgia, and odynophagia. The Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention have developed specific molecular and serologic
testing protocols and algorithms for follow-up care of suspected cases.
Currently, the mainstay of management is conservative care while researchers
attempt to develop a vaccine. Strategies to contain the Zika virus include vector
control, travel restriction for women who are pregnant or trying to become
pregnant, and avoidance of mosquito bites in endemic regions of the world.
Conclusions and Revelance: The future outlook regarding the current Zika virus
outbreak in the Americas remains uncertain. What is certain is our need to
promptly and efficiently address research gaps in our understanding of clinical
outcomes from infection and environmental factors that influence emergence
meanwhile improving diagnostic, therapeutic, and preventive measures against the 
disease.

DOI: 10.1001/jamaoto.2016.3427 
PMID: 27892990  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
