

914. Oncologist. 2013;18(2):180-9. doi: 10.1634/theoncologist.2012-0200. Epub 2013 Jan
23.

A patient-centered approach to counseling patients with head and neck cancer
undergoing human papillomavirus testing: a clinician's guide.

Chu A(1), Genden E, Posner M, Sikora A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology, Tisch Cancer Institute, Icahn School of Medicine
at Mount Sinai, One Gustave L. Levy Place, Box 1189, New York, New York 10029,
USA.

The International Agency for Research on Cancer and the National Cancer Institute
have acknowledged human papillomavirus (HPV)-16 as an independent risk factor for
oropharyngeal cancer (OPC). HPV-positive oropharyngeal cancer (HPVOPC) is a
sexually transmitted entity that is on the rise; within the next 10 years, the
annual number of HPV-associated OPC cases is projected to exceed the annual
number of cervical cancer cases in the United States. Recognition of HPV status
in OPC has broad implications beyond the traditional oncological concerns of
timely diagnosis, accurate staging, and appropriate treatment of cancer patients.
The National Comprehensive Cancer Network recommends testing the tumor site for
HPV-status during OPC management; it is likely this will become a standard
component of care for patients with high-probability tumors of the oropharynx. As
the practice of HPV testing becomes more common, it behooves providers to be able
to adequately address the concerns of patients with HPVOPC. Although there are
currently few relevant studies focusing on this population, existing literature
on HPV-infected women and patients with cervical cancer strongly supports the
concept that patients with HPVOPC need education to optimally address concerns
such as self-blame, guilt, intimacy, and interpersonal relationships. When HPV
testing is done, it should be accompanied by evidence-driven and patient-centered
counseling to best minimize negative psychosocial outcomes and ensure optimum
health promotion. Based on the current state of the literature, this article is
intended to be a reference for physicians to effectively manage psychosocial
outcomes when diagnosing patients with HPV-associated OPC.

DOI: 10.1634/theoncologist.2012-0200 
PMCID: PMC3579602
PMID: 23345545  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
