

918. J Virol. 2016 Aug 26;90(18):8047-58. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01079-16. Print 2016 Sep
15.

Major Histocompatibility Complex Class II HLA-DRα Is Downregulated by Kaposi's
Sarcoma-Associated Herpesvirus-Encoded Lytic Transactivator RTA and MARCH8.

Sun Z(1), Jha HC(1), Pei YG(1), Robertson ES(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery and Tumor Virology
Program, Abramson Comprehensive Cancer Center, Perelman School of Medicine at the
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.
(2)Department of Otorhinolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery and Tumor Virology
Program, Abramson Comprehensive Cancer Center, Perelman School of Medicine at the
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA
erle@mail.med.upenn.edu.

Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus (KSHV) maintains two modes of life cycle,
the latent and lytic phases. To evade the attack of the cell host's immune
system, KSHV switches from the lytic to the latent phase, a phase in which only a
few of viral proteins are expressed. The mechanism by which KSHV evades the
attack of the immune system and establishes latency has not been fully
understood. Major histocompatibility complex class II (MHC-II) molecules are key 
components of the immune system defense mechanism against viral infections. Here 
we report that HLA-DRα, a member of the MHC-II molecules, was downregulated by
the replication and transcription activator (RTA) protein encoded by KSHV ORF50, 
an important regulator of the viral life cycle. RTA not only downregulated
HLA-DRα at the protein level through direct binding and degradation through the
proteasome pathway but also indirectly downregulated the protein level of HLA-DRα
by enhancing the expression of MARCH8, a member of the membrane-associated
RING-CH (MARCH) proteins. Our findings indicate that KSHV RTA facilitates evasion
of the virus from the immune system through manipulation of HLA-DRα.IMPORTANCE:
Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus (KSHV) has a causal role in a number of
human cancers, and its persistence in infected cells is controlled by the host's 
immune system. The mechanism by which KSHV evades an attack by the immune system 
has not been well understood. This work represents studies which identify a novel
mechanism by which the virus can facilitate evasion of an immune system. We now
show that RTA, the replication and transcription activator encoded by KSHV
(ORF50), can function as an E3 ligase to degrade HLA-DRα. It can directly bind
and induce degradation of HLA-DRα through the ubiquitin-proteasome degradation
pathway. In addition to the direct regulation of HLA-DRα, RTA can also indirectly
downregulate the level of HLA-DRα protein by upregulating transcription of
MARCH8. Increased MARCH8 results in the downregulation of HLA-DRα. Furthermore,
we also demonstrate that expression of HLA-DRα was impaired in KSHV de novo
infection.

Copyright © 2016, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.01079-16 
PMCID: PMC5008100 [Available on 2017-02-26]
PMID: 27356905  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
