

919. Anticancer Res. 2015 Apr;35(4):1951-9.

Targeting mTOR and AREG with everolimus, sunitinib and sorafenib in HPV-positive 
and -negative SCC.

Aderhold C(1), Faber A(2), Umbreit C(2), Birk R(2), Weiss C(2), Sommer JU(2),
Hörmann K(2), Schultz JD(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology Head and Neck Surgery, University Hospital
Mannheim, Mannheim, Germany christoph.aderhold@umm.de.
(2)Department of Otorhinolaryngology Head and Neck Surgery, University Hospital
Mannheim, Mannheim, Germany.

BACKGROUND/AIM: Head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) is an aggressive
epithelial malignancy. It is the most common neoplasm appearing in the upper
aerodigestive tract and the sixth most common cancer worldwide. The five-year
survival rate remains poor despite advances in surgery, radiation and
chemotherapy. Furthermore, the incidence of human papillomavirus (HPV)-associated
oropharyngeal cancer is rising. Thus, innovative therapy approaches are
imperative in order to improve the situation. Everolimus, an inhibitor of the
mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) and sorafenib and sunitinib, multityrosine
kinase inhibitors, have been notably effective in the therapy of different tumor 
entities. The modest side-effects and oral application of the drugs might improve
patient compliance. Expression levels of mTOR and Amphiregulin (AREG) in
p16-positive and -negative SCC (squamous cell carcinoma) and the effect of
everolimus, sorafenib or sunitinib on the expression levels of these target
proteins were assessed. As far as we are aware of, this is one of the first in
vitro studies to evaluate the effect of these small-molecule drugs with regard to
the p16 status of SCC cells.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: p16-negative HNSCC 11A and 14C cells and p16-positive
CERV196 cells were exposed to different concentrations of everolimus, sorafenib
and sunitinib for 2-8 days. Expression levels of mTOR and AREG were determined by
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) and compared against a chemonaïve
control.
RESULTS: AREG and mTOR were expressed in all tested cell lines. CERV196 displayed
a remarkable increase of mTOR expression compared to p16-negative HNSCC. On the
contrary, AREG levels were reduced by 50% in CERV196. Everolimus, sorafenib and
sunitinib significantly reduced mTOR expression. Everolimus significantly
decreased AREG expression independently of the HPV status. Sunitinib and
sorafenib increased AREG expression in HNSCC 11A and 14C but not in CERV196.
CONCLUSION: The applied drugs showed remarkable suppression of mTOR expression,
which might delay tumor progression. Interestingly, sorafenib and sunitinib
increased AREG in HNSCC 11A and 14C, which could be a possible evasive mechanism 
following incubation with these drugs. On the contrary, p16-positive CERV196
showed increased susceptibility to sorafenib and sunitinib concerning suppression
of AREG expression. Further studies are required to evaluate the HPV-dependent
differences of therapy response and the possible consequences for treatment
options.

Copyright© 2015 International Institute of Anticancer Research (Dr. John G.
Delinassios), All rights reserved.


PMID: 25862847  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
