

925. J Cell Mol Med. 2014 Jan;18(1):181-6. doi: 10.1111/jcmm.12179. Epub 2013 Nov 28.

Induction of heparanase by HPV E6 oncogene in head and neck squamous cell
carcinoma.

Hirshoren N(1), Bulvik R, Neuman T, Rubinstein AM, Meirovitz A, Elkin M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology, Head & Neck Surgery, Hadassah-Hebrew University 
Medical Center, Jerusalem, Israel.

High-risk human papillomavirus (HPV)-positive head and neck squamous cell
carcinomas (HNSCCs) are highly invasive; however the identity of downstream
effectors responsible for their aggressive phenotype remains underinvestigated.
Here, we report that HPV-mediated up-regulation of heparanase enzyme can provide 
mechanistic explanation for augmented invasiveness of HPV-positive HNSCCs.
Heparanase is the sole mammalian enzyme (endo-β-d-glucuronidase) degrading
heparan sulphate glycosaminoglycan, key polysaccharide of the extracellular
matrix. Cleavage of heparan sulphate by heparanase leads to disassembly of
extracellular barriers, enabling local invasion and metastatic spread of the
tumour, and releases heparan sulphate-bound growth factors from the extracellular
depots. Heparanase is tightly implicated in head and neck cancer progression;
yet, molecular mechanisms underlying transcriptional activation of the heparanase
gene in HNSCC are largely unknown. We found that HPV16 oncogene E6 is capable of 
inducing overexpression of heparanase in HNSCC. Notably, radiation treatment
dose-dependently suppresses E6-induced heparanase expression in vitro. Our
results provide the first evidence for a functional involvement of HPV in
heparanase induction in head and neck tumourigenesis and, given ongoing clinical 
testing of several heparanase-inhibiting compounds, offer important avenue for
future therapeutic exploration in HNSCC, as well as other HPV-associated
malignancies (i.e. cervical carcinoma).

© 2013 The Authors. Journal of Cellular and Molecular Medicine published by John 
Wiley & Sons Ltd and Foundation for Cellular and Molecular Medicine.

DOI: 10.1111/jcmm.12179 
PMCID: PMC3916129
PMID: 24286246  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
