

945. Cesk Patol. 2013 Jan;49(1):29-34.

[The testing strategy for detection of biologically relevant infection of human
papillomavirus in head and neck tumors for routine pathological analysis].

[Article in Czech]

Kašpírková J, Ondič O, Cerná K, Skálová A.

There is a subgroup among head and neck squamous cell carcinomas, which is
etiologically linked to the infection of high-risk human papillomavirus (HPV). In
recent studies, HPV related squamous cell carcinomas have been placed in a
separate group because of their different epidemiology, distinctive
histopathological characteristics, therapeutic response and clinical outcome. The
reported prevalence of high-risk HPV in head and neck tumors varies in different 
studies. This fact occurs mainly due to the absence of a widely accepted
consensus for HPV detection in head and neck malignancies. We present a
methodological algorithm for detection of biologically relevant HPV infection: a 
combination of an immunohistochemical staining of the p16 protein - a surrogate
marker for a transforming HPV infection, and a molecular genetic identification
of HPV DNA by three different polymerase chain reactions (PCR). The study group
consisted of 41 patients with a tumor in head and neck region. A verification of 
detection of biologically relevant HPV infection has been performed in 10
available samples using an alternative approach, which comprised the detection of
RNA transcript of HPV by reverse transcription followed by PCR (RT-PCR), and
further in situ hybridization (ISH) with a commercial high-risk HPV probe. We
have found a high correlation between HPV DNA detection using triple-PCR approach
and strong diffuse positivity of the p16 protein (correlation coefficient 0.94)
and have confirmed the validity of this algorithm. In 94 % of HPV related
squamous cell carcinomas HPV type 16 was detected. In one case HPV type 33 was
identified. That is in agreement with earlier published data. A more appropriate 
alternative method for the detection of biologically relevant- transforming HPV
infection seems to be RT-PCR, which proved 100 % agreement with the original
methodological approach of p16 determination and PCR status. Interpretation of
the ISH has been complicated by frequent nonspecific staining of the sample and
its routine usage in the diagnostic algorithm of our laboratory is currently not 
feasible.


PMID: 23432073  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
