

949. J Biol Chem. 2010 Aug 6;285(32):24729-39. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.106260. Epub 2010
Jun 1.

A novel L-ficolin/mannose-binding lectin chimeric molecule with enhanced activity
against Ebola virus.

Michelow IC(1), Dong M, Mungall BA, Yantosca LM, Lear C, Ji X, Karpel M, Rootes
CL, Brudner M, Houen G, Eisen DP, Kinane TB, Takahashi K, Stahl GL, Olinger GG,
Spear GT, Ezekowitz RA, Schmidt EV.

Author information: 
(1)From the Program of Developmental Immunology, Department of Pediatrics,
Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts
02114.

Ebola viruses constitute a newly emerging public threat because they cause
rapidly fatal hemorrhagic fevers for which no treatment exists, and they can be
manipulated as bioweapons. We targeted conserved N-glycosylated carbohydrate
ligands on viral envelope surfaces using novel immune therapies. Mannose-binding 
lectin (MBL) and L-ficolin (L-FCN) were selected because they function as
opsonins and activate complement. Given that MBL has a complex quaternary
structure unsuitable for large scale cost-effective production, we sought to
develop a less complex chimeric fusion protein with similar ligand recognition
and enhanced effector functions. We tested recombinant human MBL and three
L-FCN/MBL variants that contained the MBL carbohydrate recognition domain and
varying lengths of the L-FCN collagenous domain. Non-reduced chimeric proteins
formed predominantly nona- and dodecameric oligomers, whereas recombinant human
MBL formed octadecameric and larger oligomers. Surface plasmon resonance revealed
that L-FCN/MBL76 had the highest binding affinities for
N-acetylglucosamine-bovine serum albumin and mannan. The same chimeric protein
displayed superior complement C4 cleavage and binding to calreticulin (cC1qR), a 
putative receptor for MBL. L-FCN/MBL76 reduced infection by wild type Ebola virus
Zaire significantly greater than the other molecules. Tapping mode atomic force
microscopy revealed that L-FCN/MBL76 was significantly less tall than the other
molecules despite similar polypeptide lengths. We propose that alterations in the
quaternary structure of L-FCN/MBL76 resulted in greater flexibility in the
collagenous or neck region. Similarly, a more pliable molecule might enhance
cooperativity between the carbohydrate recognition domains and their cognate
ligands, complement activation, and calreticulin binding dynamics. L-FCN/MBL
chimeric proteins should be considered as potential novel therapeutics.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M110.106260 
PMCID: PMC2915709
PMID: 20516066  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
