

990. Clin Anat. 2015 Nov;28(8):1002-7. doi: 10.1002/ca.22620. Epub 2015 Sep 9.

Human papillomavirus infection in the oromaxillofacial area: Clinical anatomy and
histological considerations.

Ilea A(1), Boşca B(2), MiclĂuş V(3), Rus V(3), BĂbţan AM(4), CÂmpian RS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Rehabilitation, Oral Health and Dental Office Management,
"Iuliu Haţieganu" University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Oral Health and Dental
Office Management, Faculty of Dentistry, Cluj-Napoca, Romania.
(2)Department of Histology, "Iuliu Haţieganu" University of Medicine and
Pharmacy, Faculty of Medicine, Cluj-Napoca, Romania.
(3)Department of Histology and Embryology, University of Agricultural Sciences
and Veterinary Medicine, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Cluj-Napoca.
(4)Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, Clinical County Hospital
Cluj-Napoca, "Iuliu Haṭieganu" University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Faculty of
Dentistry, Cluj-Napoca, Romania.

Clinical manifestations of human papillomavirus (HPV) infection in the head and
neck can range from benign lesions, which are the most frequent, to malignant
lesions. The prevalence of head and neck cancer is increasing, despite currently 
decreasing trends in known risk factors such as smoking and alcohol use. A new
patient profile has appeared in recent practice: most frequently a middle-aged
male patient who does not smoke or drink alcohol, is sexually active (possibly
having multiple partners), and presents with oral or cervicofacial lesions
requiring diagnosis and treatment. Another risk factor that should be considered 
in these patients is HPV infection. The association of oral potentially malignant
disorders (OPMD) with HPV is a challenge for the medical practitioner. The gold
standard for diagnosis is histopathological examination, which can also yield
evidence suggesting HPV infection. Determination of the viral genotype provides
additional data for assessing the oncological risk of an HPV infection. Treatment
of these patients is aimed at removing the lesions, in association or not with
antiviral treatment and recurrence control.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ca.22620 
PMID: 26331491  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
