

993. Am J Rhinol Allergy. 2015 Nov-Dec;29(6):e197-200. doi: 10.2500/ajra.2015.29.4242.

The role of viruses in the clinical presentation of chronic rhinosinusitis.

Rowan NR(1), Lee S, Sahu N, Kanaan A, Cox S, Phillips CD, Wang EW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, University of Pittsburgh
Medical Center, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA.

BACKGROUND: The role of viruses in chronic rhinosinusitis (CRS) is poorly
understood. In part, this is secondary to difficulty in isolating viruses.
Although traditional detection methods for respiratory viruses have had little
clinical utility, modern viral screening techniques that use molecular sequencing
are now both rapid and feasible, which makes analysis of the paranasal sinus
microbiome more accessible.
OBJECTIVE: To detect respiratory viruses in the paranasal sinuses of patients
with CRS and of healthy controls as well as to correlate clinical and
radiographic measures of CRS with viral presence.
METHODS: In this prospective study, 13 patients with CRS with nasal polyposis
(CRSwNP) and 8 patients without nasal polyposis (CRSsNP) were enrolled and
compared with 14 healthy controls. Samples were obtained from the paranasal
sinuses and were screened for viral DNA with polymerase chain reaction--based
sequencing techniques. Typical symptoms of CRS, the Sinonasal Questionnaire, and 
objective measures, including the modified Lund-Mackay and modified Lund-Kennedy 
scores were obtained.
RESULTS: Eighty percent of the positive screens (4/5) were found in patients with
CRSsNP, whereas 20% of the positive tests (1/5) were in the CRSwNP group, and
none of the controls tested positive (p = 0.0029). Coronavirus was the most
common virus detected. Sinonasal Questionnaire scores of the patients with CRS
who tested positive for viruses were higher but not statistically different than 
those without a positive screen (p = 0.31). Radiographic and endoscopic measures 
of disease were not significantly different in the setting of a positive viral
screen (p = 0.12 and 0.11 respectively).
CONCLUSION: Although traditionally difficult, advances in molecular sequencing
enhance detection of viruses in the sinonasal tract. In this study, respiratory
viruses were more commonly isolated from patients with CRS compared with healthy 
controls. Moreover, viral infection may play a greater role in symptom
exacerbation in CRSsNP than in CRSwNP. These findings warrant further
investigation into the role of the viral microbiome in CRS.

DOI: 10.2500/ajra.2015.29.4242 
PMID: 26637569  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
