

995. Auris Nasus Larynx. 2018 Apr;45(2):328-331. doi: 10.1016/j.anl.2017.03.021. Epub 
2017 Apr 14.

Branchial cleft cyst: An unusual site for the cervical metastasis of
nasopharyngeal carcinoma.

Liao YC(1), Adel M(2), Lee LY(3), Chang KP(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology-Head & Neck Surgery, Chang Gung Memorial
Hospital, Kwei-Shan, Tao-Yuan, Taiwan.
(2)Department of Otolaryngology-Head & Neck Surgery, Chang Gung Memorial
Hospital, Kwei-Shan, Tao-Yuan, Taiwan; Division of Surgical Oncology-Department
of Surgery, Al-Azhar University Hospitals, Al-Azhar Faculty of Medicine, Cairo,
Egypt.
(3)Department of Pathology, Chang Gung Memorial Hospital, Kwei-Shan, Tao-Yuan,
Taiwan; College of Medicine, Chang Gung University, Kwei-Shan, Tao-Yuan, Taiwan.
(4)Department of Otolaryngology-Head & Neck Surgery, Chang Gung Memorial
Hospital, Kwei-Shan, Tao-Yuan, Taiwan; College of Medicine, Chang Gung
University, Kwei-Shan, Tao-Yuan, Taiwan. Electronic address:
dr.kpchang@gmail.com.

OBJECTIVE: Cancers found in the resected branchial cleft cyst are rare clinically
but usually impose substantive diagnostic and treatment challenges for
clinicians.
METHODS: A 31-year-old man presented with a lateral neck mass that was suspected 
to be an inflammatory branchial cleft cyst. After excision, the pathologic
specimen revealed a benign cystic appearance with a focus of undifferentiated
carcinoma. Serologic tests for Epstein-Barr virus were negative. A positron
emission tomography scan and upper aerodigestive tract endoscopies were negative 
for any other suspicious lesion.
RESULTS: The patient underwent random biopsies of the nasopharynx, tongue base,
and hypopharynx and bil tonsillectomy. Pathologic examination of the
nasopharyngeal biopsies showed the presence of undifferentiated carcinoma. The
cancerous part of the branchial cleft cyst and this nasopharyngeal specimen were 
positive for the latent membrane protein-1 and EBV-encoded RNAs of Epstein-Barr
virus (EBV) and confirmed our diagnosis.
CONCLUSION: This is the first report of a NPC metastasizing to a branchial cleft 
cyst. Molecular diagnostic techniques facilitate the definite diagnosis that
enabled us to refine treatment plans and offered the patient a favorable outcome.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.anl.2017.03.021 
PMID: 28413147  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
