

26. J Infect. 2017 Jul;75(1):48-58. doi: 10.1016/j.jinf.2017.04.012. Epub 2017 May 5.

Quasispecies characteristics in mother-to-child transmission of hepatitis B virus
by next-generation sequencing.

Yang G(1), Liu Z(2), Yang J(2), Luo K(2), Xu Y(2), He H(2), Fu Q(2), Yu S(3),
Wang Z(4).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Organ Failure Research, Guangdong Provincial Key
Laboratory of Viral Hepatitis Research, Department of Infectious Diseases,
Nanfang Hospital, Southern Medical University, Guangzhou, China; Department of
Epidemiology, School of Public Health and Tropical Medicine, Southern Medical
University, Guangzhou, China.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Organ Failure Research, Guangdong Provincial Key
Laboratory of Viral Hepatitis Research, Department of Infectious Diseases,
Nanfang Hospital, Southern Medical University, Guangzhou, China.
(3)Department of Epidemiology, School of Public Health and Tropical Medicine,
Southern Medical University, Guangzhou, China. Electronic address:
qingchen@smu.edu.cn.
(4)State Key Laboratory of Organ Failure Research, Guangdong Provincial Key
Laboratory of Viral Hepatitis Research, Department of Infectious Diseases,
Nanfang Hospital, Southern Medical University, Guangzhou, China. Electronic
address: w851419@yahoo.com.

OBJECTIVES: To identify within-host quasispecies characteristics of hepatitis B
virus (HBV) in mothers and children infected via mother-to-child transmission
(MTCT).
METHODS: Using next-generation sequencing (NGS), we analyzed sequences within the
non-overlapping pre-core/core (pre-C/C) gene in 37 mother-child pairs.
RESULTS: Phylogenetic and Highlighter analyses suggested that both a single
strain and multiple distinct strains may be transmitted in MTCT of HBV. However, 
analysis of reassembled viral sequences revealed a relatively narrow distribution
of variants in children, which was confirmed by a lower viral diversity in
children than that in mothers. New closely related variants with combinations of 
two to five high-frequency mutations were observed in seven children with
elevated ALT levels; the new variants out-competed the transmitted maternal
variants to become the dominant strains in five of them. Furthermore, 30
mutations with a frequency >1% of all viruses within-host were present in those
children; the mutations caused 19 amino-acid substitutions. Interestingly, almost
all were located within the well-known T-cell or B-cell epitopes.
CONCLUSIONS: There are restrictive changes that occur in the early stages of
chronic HBV infection through MTCT with different clinical consequences. These
data might have important implications for future investigations of interrelated 
immunopathogenesis and therapeutic strategies.

Copyright © 2017 The British Infection Association. Published by Elsevier Ltd.
All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jinf.2017.04.012 
PMID: 28483405  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
