

29. FEBS J. 2017 Nov;284(21):3550-3572. doi: 10.1111/febs.14094. Epub 2017 May 19.

Virus-host interplay in hepatitis B virus infection and epigenetic treatment
strategies.

Hensel KO(1), Rendon JC(2)(3), Navas MC(3), Rots MG(2), Postberg J(1).

Author information: 
(1)HELIOS Medical Centre Wuppertal, Paediatrics Centre, Centre for Clinical &
Translational Research (CCTR), Faculty of Health, Centre for Biomedical Education
& Research (ZBAF), Witten/Herdecke University, Germany.
(2)Epigenetic Editing, Department of Pathology and Medical Biology, University of
Groningen, University Medical Center Groningen (UMCG), The Netherlands.
(3)Grupo de Gastrohepatologia, Facultad de Medicina, Universidad de Antioquia
(UdeA), Medellin, Colombia.

Worldwide, chronic hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection is a major health problem
and no cure exists. Importantly, hepatocyte intrusion by HBV particles results in
a complex deregulation of both viral and host cellular genetic and epigenetic
processes. Among the attempts to develop novel therapeutic approaches against HBV
infection, several options targeting the epigenomic regulation of HBV replication
are gaining attention. These include the experimental treatment with 'epidrugs'. 
Moreover, as a targeted approach, the principle of 'epigenetic editing' recently 
is being exploited to control viral replication. Silencing of HBV by specific
rewriting of epigenetic marks might diminish viral replication, viremia, and
infectivity, eventually controlling the disease and its complications.
Additionally, epigenetic editing can be used as an experimental tool to increase 
our limited understanding regarding the role of epigenetic modifications in viral
infections. Aiming for permanent epigenetic reprogramming of the viral genome
without unspecific side effects, this breakthrough may pave the roads for an
ambitious technological pursuit: to start designing a curative approach utilizing
manipulative molecular therapies for viral infections in vivo.

© 2017 Federation of European Biochemical Societies.

DOI: 10.1111/febs.14094 
PMID: 28457020  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
