

34. J Virol. 2017 Apr 13;91(9). pii: e00092-17. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00092-17. Print 2017
May 1.

Capsid Phosphorylation State and Hepadnavirus Virion Secretion.

Ning X(1), Basagoudanavar SH(1), Liu K(1), Luckenbaugh L(1), Wei D(2), Wang C(2),
Wei B(2), Zhao Y(3), Yan T(3), Delaney W(4), Hu J(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Pennsylvania State University
College of Medicine, Hershey, Pennsylvania, USA.
(2)China National Vaccine and Serum Institute, Beijing, China.
(3)Department of Infectious Diseases, First Affiliated Hospital, School of
Medicine, Xi'an Jiaotong University, Xi'an, Shaanxi, China.
(4)Gilead Sciences, Inc., Foster City, California, USA.
(5)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Pennsylvania State University
College of Medicine, Hershey, Pennsylvania, USA juh13@psu.edu.

The C-terminal domain (CTD) of hepadnavirus core protein is involved in multiple 
steps of viral replication. In particular, the CTD is initially phosphorylated at
multiple sites to facilitate viral RNA packaging into immature nucleocapsids
(NCs) and the early stage of viral DNA synthesis. For the avian hepadnavirus duck
hepatitis B virus (DHBV), CTD is dephosphorylated subsequently to facilitate the 
late stage of viral DNA synthesis and to stabilize NCs containing mature viral
DNA. The role of CTD phosphorylation in virion secretion, if any, has remained
unclear. Here, the CTD from the human hepatitis B virus (HBV) was found to be
dephosphorylated in association with NC maturation and secretion of
DNA-containing virions, as in DHBV. In contrast, the CTD in empty HBV virions
(i.e., enveloped capsids with no RNA or DNA) was found to be phosphorylated. The 
potential role of CTD dephosphorylation in virion secretion was analyzed through 
mutagenesis. For secretion of empty HBV virions, which is independent of either
viral RNA packaging or DNA synthesis, multiple substitutions in the CTD to mimic 
either phosphorylation or dephosphorylation showed little detrimental effect.
Similarly, phospho-mimetic substitutions in the DHBV CTD did not block the
secretion of DNA-containing virions. These results indicate that CTD
dephosphorylation, though associated with NC maturation in both HBV and DHBV, is 
not essential for the subsequent NC-envelope interaction to secrete
DNA-containing virions, and the CTD state of phosphorylation also does not play
an essential role in the interaction between empty capsids and the envelope for
secretion of empty virions.IMPORTANCE The phosphorylation state of the C-terminal
domain (CTD) of hepatitis B virus (HBV) core or capsid protein is highly dynamic 
and plays multiple roles in the viral life cycle. To study the potential role of 
the state of phosphorylation of CTD in virion secretion, we have analyzed the CTD
phosphorylation state in complete (containing the genomic DNA) versus empty
(genome-free) HBV virions. Whereas CTD is unphosphorylated in complete virions,
it is phosphorylated in empty virions. Mutational analyses indicate that neither 
phosphorylation nor dephosphorylation of CTD is required for virion secretion.
These results demonstrate that while CTD dephosphorylation is associated with HBV
DNA synthesis, the CTD state of phosphorylation may not regulate virion
secretion.

Copyright © 2017 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/JVI.00092-17 
PMCID: PMC5391479
PMID: 28228589  [Indexed for MEDLINE]
